LIBRARY OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION 
EDITED BY 
S. RADHAKRISHNAN, LL.D., F.B.A. 
I 
PURVA-MIMAMSĂ 
IN ITS SOURCES 
BENARES HINDU UNIVERSITY 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ 
IN ITS SOURCES 
BY 
Mahāmahopadhyaya DR. SIR GANGANATHA JHA, Kt., M.A.. D.Litt., LL.D., Vidyasagara, Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy 
WITH A CRITICAL BIBLIOGRAPHY BY 
DR. UMESHA MISHRA, 
Kavyatırtha, M.A., D.Litt. 
ROYAL 
ASIATIO 
SOCIETY 
TY OF 
LIBRARY. 
ENGAL 
BENARES HINDU UNIVERSITY 
1942 
PUBLISHED BY 
THE BENABES HINDU UNIVERSITY BENARES. 
COPYRIGHT 
Sl No 048488 
25123 
PRINTED BY K. MITTRA, AT THE INDIAN PRESS, LTI 
ALLAHABAD. 
GENERAL PREFACE 
At a time when civilisation is in peril and schemes of social reconstruction are in the air, it is wise to know what the seers of the past have said on the deeper problems of thought and life. The question of the nature and destiny of man, the purpose of society, its relation to the individual are near and intimate to each one of us. But only a select few care to spend the greater part of their lives over them and fewer still their whole lives and energies. But these few, whatever divergent answers they may seem to have found, stand high above ordinary humanity and have struggled to heights which have been gradually won for us. Man is a teachable animal, and by a sympathetic study of the past gropings and stumblings of mankind, he can avoid, though not error, at least its repetition. 
In India the problems of philosophy and religion have occupied for centuries an important place. While the leaders of philosophy have attempted to solve the riddle of existence, the teachers of religion have sought to supply us with an ordered scheme of life. The story of Indian thought gives us an important chapter, in what Lessing calls, the education of the human race. What is note- worthy is not the painful ignorance natural to a world over which generations of wild men have swept but the attempt to rise out of that ignorance. The greatness of the ancient thinkers of India is that they struggled persistently and often successfully to discover the spiritual values which enlarge the mind and add to the beauty of life. The progress of man, it is generally admitted today, is a continuous victory of thought over passion, of tolerance oyer fanaticism, of persuasion over force. 
vi 
GENERAL PREFACE 
In this series, it is proposed to bring out studies of ancient Indian classics and thought by competent scholars who have looked at them with new eyes and greater freedom. We are proud that the first volume is by that great scholar Mahamahopadhyaya Dr. Sir Ganganatha. Jha. His refined, gentle and retiring nature, combined with his wide culture and intense seriousness gave us the impression of one who lived the religion he professed and this volume by him is a masterpiece of completeness, clarity and compression. 
15th April, 1942. 
S. R. 
PREFACE TO THE VOLUME 
The idea of a History of Indian Philosophy first dawned upon my mind when I began a study of Madhavā- charya's Sarvadarśanasamgraha in the year 1908. This idea deepened when as Curator of the Government Oriental MSS. Library at the Deccan College Poona, in 1912, I was called upon to make a Descriptive Catalogue of Samkhya and Yoga MSS., as well as to complete the work of my predecessor in the office, Dr. S. K. Belvalkar, on Nyaya and Vedanta MSS., and to see through the press proofs of the Descriptive Catalogue of Veda and Brāhmaṇa MSS.. When he was away on study leave for a Doctor's Degree at Harvard, Dr. Belvalkar in his studies of Greek and European Philosophy at Harvard was also contem- plating a similar History of Indian Thought. I was very happy to see that our ideas had entirely coincided, and when he returned to India at the beginning of the last war, we made a scheme of a History of Indian Philosophy and submitted it to the Bombay University, under whose patronage two volumes have appeared, and a third may appear sometime hence. It was apparent, however, after we had spent a number of years on this scheme, that the work of a History of Indian Thought was a task to be attempted only on a co-operative basis. In the meanwhile, works from the pen of Sir S. Radhakrishnan and Dr. S. N. Das Gupta had already appeared. So, when at the First Philosophical Congress at Calcutta Sir S. Radhakrishnan and myself met together in 1925, we formulated a scheme for an Encyclopædic History of Indian Philosophy on behalf of the Academy of Philosophy and Religion, which had been founded in 1924. This scheme received the support of. many great scholars in and outside India, but there 
viiV111 
PREFACE 
came in the way another difficulty, namely, that of adequate financial support for such a large undertaking. It was due to this particularly, that an adequate fulfilment of the task remained pending. One volume of the Series was published years ago; another, though ready, could not. be brought out on account of financial stringency; but this volume which was first projected on behalf of the En- cyclopædic History and which was undertaken by the late Dr. Sir Ganganatha Jha is being offered to the world to-day. 
2. When Sir S. Radhakrishnan, the Raja Saheb of Aundh, and myself met at Nagpur for the session of the Indian Philosophical Congress in 1937. we discussed fully a scheme for an Indian Library of Philosophy and Religion. It was first decided to offer this series for publi- cation to some European Publishers, as that would have given due publicity to the volumes in the Series all the world over. The second great World-War, however, intervened. In the meanwhile, Sir S. Radhakrishnan for- tunately accepted the Vice-Chancellorship of the Benares. Hindu University, and it was decided to publish the Series under the ægis of the B.H.U.. The Academy had project- ed years ago volumes on Indian Philosophy as well as on Philosophy of Religion, which it was thought could well be incorporated in the scheme of the Library of Indian Philosophy and Religion, of which Sir S. Radhakrishnan kindly consented to be the General Editor. It is no wonder, therefore, that as Director of the Academy I should have felt great satisfaction in handing over the volumes projected on behalf of the Academy to be taken over by the Library of Indian Philosophy and Religion. and exclaim as an ancient Seer exclaimed long ago जातो ममायं विशदः प्रकामं प्रत्यर्पितन्यास इवान्तरात्मा. " Accordingly, 
CC 
Dr. Ganganatha Jha's volume, which was written origin- ally for the Encyclopedic History, was offered to this new 
PREFACE 
ix 
Series as its first publication. Other volumes from the Encyclopædic History which might be ready could also be incorporated in this new Series, as well as a large number of other volumes on Philosophy and Religion in general. A large number of young scholars have also come into prominence during the interim, and I am sure that the series would prosper exceedingly under the editorship of an eminent scholar like Sir S. Radhakrishnan, and under the wings of the B.H.U.. Is it too much to hope that donors and Princes who have contributed so much to the great buildings in B.H.U. would see that the publication work, which, in a sense. is more durable than works in marble, is duly endowed, so as to enable the B.H.U. to dis charge its supreme cultural and spiritual function? 
3. A tragic interest attaches to the production of this volume. It is about three years since this Mimämsä volume has been in the printers' hands, but on account of various difficulties, the publication of the volume has been delayed so long. Dr. Sir Ganganatha Jha had desired that this volume might see the light of day during his life- time. But it was not to be! The main body of the volume was already in print, but the Critical Bibliography as well as the Prefaces had to be written and printed. The Taj was not built in a day; and a monumental work like this is bound to take some time for its proper production. I had announced in my preface to Dr. Jha's Vedanta Lectures published by the Allahabad University, that a great work from his pen was coming, and that it would be the consummation of Panditji's life-work, and so it has been. I do not know that there has been any scholar in the whole length and breadth of India who has worked on the Philosophy of Mimämsä so much and so intently as Dr. Sir Ganganatha Jha has done. His translations of the Sloka-värttika and Tantra-värttika, as well as Sabara- bhäṣva, have been monumental. A pinnacle was required 
F. I 
T 
X 
up 
PREFACE 
to be placed on the edifice; and the present work, summing up in a philosophical manner the teachings of the great Mīmāmsaka philosophers, supplied the much needed desideratum. It is no exaggeration to say that if re- incarnation may be regarded as valid, Dr. Ganganatha Jha might be taken to be an avatara of Kumārila. His Doctorate thesis was ou Prabhakara no doubt, but the consummation of his life's work was in the exposition of the philosophy of Kumarila, which has not been attempted by anybody hitherto. Like Kumärila. Sir Ganganatha Jha left his mortal body on the banks of the Ganges at Prayāga. To me personally, as it was to many an eminent Doctor, it was a wonderful sight to see the Panditji sitting in a Yogic posture throughout the entire last month of his life without pause. It was a feat which could be accomplished by rarely any person during the last stages of his life. When Dr. Umesha Mishra and myself had been to pay our respects to the Revered Panditji just six hours before he passed away--alas! we did not know that it was our final visit to him, nor that it was the final visit that he granted consciously to anybody he appeared to us, and we shall long cherish the impression, that he was a lion among philosophers." roused from his Samadhic slumber and speaking consciously to us. The mainstay of his final programme must have been the powerful support which he received from his moral and spiritual life, led continuously through a period of more than seventy years. Like Kumārila, he was the great connecting link between. Mimämsä and Vedanta. Born in Videha, there is no doubt that he must have reached Mukti of the Videha type! 
4. It was a noble act on the part of the Raja Saheb of Aundh to have contributed to the publication of this volume. Shrimant Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi, B.A., knows the value of such a work more than almost any 
- 
PREFACE 
X] 
other Prince. The powerful support which he gave to the work of the Academy has enabled it to endure so long, while his final gift to the Academy, and through it to the Library of Indian Philosophy and Religion, has been the endowment for this volume. Leading a life of absolute self-abnegation, with every pie of his hard-earned money devoted to sublime causes, with a rare interest in works of Art of which his Acropolitan Museum at Aundh will remain a standing example for generations to come, with the princely donations which he has given to the cause of Indian Literature, History and Culture, with a rare love for his subjects and their constitutional welfare, Shrimant Raja Saheb of Aundh stands out as a prominent personality among the Princes, the sum total of whose achievements within the gamut of his finance is hard to achieve by any other Prince similarly situated. I am sure that Shrimant Balasaheb has laid the philosophic world under very deep obligation by his gift for the publication of this volume. 
5. To Pandit Amaranatha Jha, I am indebted in the publication of this volume more than I can say. From the very inception of the idea of the publication, his help in the matter has been immense. I have to thank him for having kindly consented to my request to write an Introductory Note to this volume. If the revered Panditji had been living, no doubt he would have done it himself, as he did in the case of the Allahabad University publication of his Vedanta Lectures. Nevertheless, as an ancient Indian adage would have it, "gear" has a great truth underlying it, and it is only in the fitness of things that a person so highly situated as Pandit Amaranatha Jha, so filial, so devoted and so reverential to his father's life- work, should represent the Panditji in a personal Intro- ductory Note to this volume. Pandit Ksetresha Chandra Chattopadhyaya has been the primum movens of this 
वै 
X11 
PREFACE 
publication. Had it not been for him, it would not have been possible to arrange so adequately for the printing of this difficult work, and it would be hard to exaggerate the very keen interest which he has taken throughout the whole course of its publication. Dr. Umesha Mishra, like a loyal pupil and Teacher's son of the Panditji, has at least partly paid his debt to his Teacher by the Critical Bibliographical Note which he has written for the volume, and the frame- work of which Panditji had seen and approved of during his life-time. Dr. Umesha Mishra's reference to the Maharashtra Pandit Gägäbhaṭṭa, the Coronation Pre- ceptor of Shivaji, who completed the Śloka-värttika of Kumārila, would please all Maharashtra scholars not a little. The Indian Press have accomplished this task in the entire spirit of a labour of love. They have never looked at this publication from the business point of view. They understood the greatness of this work of the revered Panditji, and they have given us of their best in the pro- duction of this volume. A work like this represents, in true Mimämsä style, a great work of Sacrifice. Different Ritviks, representing different functions, are required for the completion of such a Sacrifice; and to all the above our deepest thanks are due for the consummation of the A cabhritha ceremony which has thus been reached through their combined and devout assistance. 
Allahabad. 
17th March, 1942. 
R. D. RANADE. 
INTRODUCTORY NOTE 
It is Professor Ranade's wish that I should write a few introductory words. I had the privilege of colla- borating with my father in his revised translation of the Kāryaprakāsha and in the edition of the poet Chandra's Mahesharani. Unfortunately, my own leanings have always been for literature and drama, and my philosophi- cal attainments, in spite of the valuable opportunities I had at home, are nil. I cannot, therefore, say anything useful about this work. But as a child I remember the daily labours of my father both at home and at the residence of Mahamahopadhyaya Pandit Chitradhara Mishra. I remember the care with which he used to correct the proofs of the Tantra-rärttika and Shloka- cārttika as they came from the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Indeed, I cannot recall any time when he was not reading or writing. At College he had to teach, unaided, all the six classes, from the Intermediate to the M.A.; he had to work at Boards and Committees, Senate and Syndicate; at Benares he had heavy administrative duties as Principal of the Sanskrit College, Superintendent of Sanskrit. Studies, and Registrar; on coming back to Allahabad, he had charge of the reorganised University, which for five years controlled the affiliated colleges also; he was head of a large family; towards the closing days of his life, he suffered several domestic bereavements. But during the entire period of forty years, over which I can look back, I do not remember a single day when he was without his books and when he was not engaged in literary work. And it was not all philosophical work. He contributed regularly to the Leader "Musings of an Idler," in which he discussed almost every topic under the sun, religious, 
+ 
xiii 
XIV 
INTRODUCTORY NOTE 
educational, social, political. 
As a member of the Council 
of State, he took a leading part in its deliberations. He delivered several Convocation Addresses. He delivered presidential addresses at the Oriental Conference and the Philosophical Congress. He delivered a series of lectures on Poetry for the Hindustani Academy, and a series of Hindi lectures for the Patna University. The only light reading he indulged in for relaxation was in biographical literature. We, who were so much younger and had more energy, marvelled at his industry and his versatility. In his last days he was anxious that this work on Mimamsā, should appear early; he was anxious about the Introduc- tion which he had undertaken to contribute to his revised. translation of the Chhandogya Upanishad; he was anxious to correct the last portions of the proofs of the Virada- chintamani, which he had translated for the "Gaekwad Oriental Series.* He had no other anxieties. He was ready and willing to depart. It is the pious privilege of the survivors to see to the publication of the last works which, despite feeble health and failing sight, he had completed. 
December 10, 1941. 
AMARANATHA JHA. 
LIST OF CONTENTS 
General Preface ... 
Preface to the Volume 
Introductory Note 
CHAPTER I 
Introductory and Bibliographical 
Bibliography of Purva Mimāṁsä 
Philosophical Topics 
CHAPTER II 
(A) 'Soul' according to Shabara (B) 'Soul' according to Prabhakara (C) Soul' according to Kumärila 
: : 
PAGES 
vii 
xiii 
1-25 
11 
26-35 
... 
26 
28 
32 
Liberation 
CHAPTER III 
36-39 
36 
36 
37 
(A) Liberation of Soul-Mokṣa 
(B) Liberation according to Prabhakara (C) Liberation according to Kumärila 
CHAPTER IV 
Body, Sense-urgans and Mind... 
(A) According to Prabhakara (B) According to Kumarila 
*** 
God 
CHAPTER V 
(A) According to Shabara (B) According to Prabhākara 
(C) According to Kumārila ... 
CHAPTER VI 
Reality of the External World.. 
... 
(A) According to Shabara (B) According to Prabhäkara (C) According to Kumārila 
Things of the World 
(A) Shabara's View 
... 
40-42 
40 
40 
43-52 
43 
44 
17 
53-60 
53 
56 
58 
*** 
CHAPTER VII 
(B) Prabhakara's View 
(C) Kumärila's View 
61-66 
61 
61 
65 
IV 
xvi 
Heaven 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER VIII 
Jati-Universal 
(A) Preliminary Note 
CHAPTER IX 
... 
(B) Shabara's View of the Universal 
(C) Prabhakara's View 
(D) Kumārila's View 
CHAPTER X 
Prumāṇa-Means of Valid Cognition 
(A) Prabhakara's View Regarding Cognition and Its 
Validity 
(B) Bhaṭṭa View 
(C) Murari Mishra's View 
CHAPTER XI 
Different Kinds of Valid Cognition-Perception 
(A) Shabara's View 
(B) Prabhakara's View 
(C) Bhaṭṭa View 
Anumana-Inference 
(A) Shabara's View 
CHAPTER XII 
... 
(B) Prabhakara's View 
(C) Bhatta View 
CHAPTER XIII 
PAGES 
67 
68-76 
68 
69 
69 
72 
77-89 
77 
84 
88 
90-99 
: 
90 
92 
98 
... 
100-109 
100 
101 
106 
Verbal Cognition-Scriptural Injunction According to 
Shabara 
... 
The Sentence and Its Meaning 
110-127 
123 
Veda Not the Work of Personal Being 
126 
... 
CHAPTER XIV 
Scriptural or Verbal Cognition According to Prabhakara 128-143 
The Sentence and Its Meaning 
... 
Veda Not the Work of Personal Being ... 
135 
139 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER XV 
xvii 
PAGES 
Scriptural or Verbal Cognition According to Kumārila 144--153 
What is Word 
What is it that is denoted by the Word ... 
Relationship Between Word and Its Denotation 
Eternality of the Word 
Sentence and Its Meaning 
.*. 
CHAPTER XVI 
Upamāna- Analogical Cognition 
(A) According to Shabara (B) According to Prabhakara (C) According to Kumārila 
CHAPTER XVII 
Arthapatti-Presumption According to Shabara 
According to Prabhakara 
According to Kumārila 
145 
... 
145 
148 
150 
151 
154-156 
154 
154 
156 
.. 
157-160 
157 
157 
158 
CHAPTER XVIII 
Abhāva― Non-Apprehension 
161-165 
According to Shabara 
... 
161 
According to Prabhakara 
According to Kumārila 
Other Means of Cognition 
CHAPTER XIX 
Mimāmsā Topics-Proper 
... 
(A) Introductory-Shastrārambha 
161 
163 
164 
Shabara's View 
... 
Prabhakara's View 
Bhuṭṭa View 
(B) What is Dharma 
166-178 
166 
166 
... 
169 
170 
: 
172 
(C) Reliability of the Veda 
174 
(D) Sense-Perception, Inference, etc., discussed 
175 
(E) Vedic Injunction, the only reliable means of, 
knowing Dharma 
176 
(F) The Vedic Injunction Always Reliable 
177 
+ 
(G) The 'Sentence' is as Reliable as the 'Word' (H) Veda, Not the Work of Personal Author F. C. 
177 
178xviii 
CONTENTS 
PAGES 
Extent and Content of the Veda 
Mantra and Brāhmaṇa 
(A) Mantras 
... 
CHAPTER XX 
... 179-210 
179 
179 
180 
181 
(B) Classification of Mantras (C) Mantras are not Injunctive 
(1) Principle of Syntactical Unit 
(2) Principle of Syntactical Split (3) Principle of Illiptical Extension 
(B) Brahmana Text 
189 
191 
193 
195 
200 
206 
(C) Arthavada-Declamatory Texts 
(D) Númadheya-Proper Names 
CHAPTER XXI 
Smyti and Custom and Other Sources of the Knowledge 
of Dharma 
211 
253 
(A) Introductory 
211 
(B) Aṣṭakā 
213 
(C) Connotation of the term 'Smṛti' 
214 
(D) Vedangas 
218 
(E) Cases of Conflict between 'Veda' and 'Smrti' 
220 
(F) Exact Signification of Certain Words 
233 
(C) Conflict between Smrti' and 'Usage" 
235 
(H) Words current among Mlechchhas... 
236 
(I) Authority of Kalpa Sutras 
239 
(1) Extent and Sphere of the Authority of Customs (K) Grammatical Smrti 
242 
244 
(L) Words in the Veda are the same as those in 
ordinary usage 
251 
CHAPTER XXII 
What are the Jets that Constitute Dharma * 
254-270 
(A) Introductory 
254 
(B) Apurva 
256 
(C) To what word the Apurva is related 
(D) Division of Acts into Primary and Subsidiary 
(E) Classification of Acts 
(F) Grounds of Differentiation Among Acts 
263 
264 
... 
266 
268 
L 
CONTENTS 
xix 
PAGES 
CHAPTER XXIII 
" 
Principal' and' Auxiliary' Acts 
271-291 
(A) Classification of Auxiliaries 
274 
(B) Means of Ascertaining what is auxiliary to what (C) Cases of Conflict 
279 
283 
CHAPTER XXIV 
Motive 
'Kratvartha' and Puruşartha' Acts 
292-297 
292 
CHAPTER XXV 
Order of Sequence 
298-304 
CHAPTER XXVI 
Sacrifices 
305-327 
(A) Qualifications of the performer of Sacrifices (B) What is Heaven 
305 
306 
(C) Deities not Entitled to perform Sacrifices (D) Are Women entitled to perform Sacrifices? (E) Is the Shūdra entitled to perform Sacrifices? (F) The Rathakura' and the Nişādasthapati' are 
307 
308 
313 
entitled to perform Sacrifices 
314 
(G) Disqualification for performers of Sacrifices (H) Sattras-Communistic Sacrifices 
316 
318 
(I) Prohibitions-Exact Significance 
Capacity for performance 
(J) Initiation 
Vishvajit Sacrifice 
CHAPTER XXVII 
Atidesha'-Transference of Details 
320 
323 
325 
325 
328-333 
Uha-Modification 
CHAPTER XXVIII 
... 334-340 
CHAPTER XXIX 
"Bädha' - Exclusion 
Meaning of the Negative term 
341-347 
346 
CHAPTER XXX 
Tantra --Centralisation 
348-351 
ΧΙ 
CONTENTS 
(B) Vikalpa-Option 
CHAPTER XXXI 
(A) Prasanga-Extended Application 
CHAPTER XXXII 
Arts-Sacrifices 
Dakṣina-Sacrificial Fee 
CHAPTER XXXIII 
PAGES 
... 
... 352-358 353 
... 
359-366 
364 
Influence of Mimämsä on Legal & Other Branches 
of Literature 
Index 
Appendix-Critical Bibliography (MImāṁsākusu- 
manjali) 
367-387 
i-xvi 
1-81 
eft: 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
Students of Indian Literature have long been conversant with the term 'Sad-darshana,' 'Six Systems of Philosophy.' One cannot however fail to observe that this is a misnomer. It is true it is an old term; we read, for instance, in the Mahanirvāṇa-tantra— 
षड्दर्शनमहाकूपे पतिताः सर्वजन्तवः । परमार्थे न जानन्ति पशुपाशनियन्त्रिताः ॥ 
Even here however the Six Systems are spoken of somewhat vaguely and deprecatingly. 
Though the expression has the sanction of long usage behind it, it appears to have been not known in ancient times. This is clear from the fact that in the enunciation of the various branches. of literature which a seeker after truth was advised to study, there is no mention of the sir darshanas'; and also it does not 
4 
occur in the list of the several vidyāsthānas,' subjects of learning, provided by the Ancients. For instance, (1) we have the follow- 
ing list in the Chhandogya Upanisad (7.1.2.)- 
. . The 
The Rgveda, the Yajurveda, the Samaveda, the Atharvana, the Itihasa-Purana, the Veda of the Vedas, the Rites of the Fathers, Mathematics, Science of Portents, Science of Time, Logic, Ethics and Politics, Etymology, Science of the Veda, Science of Elementals, Science of War, Astronomy, Snake-charm- ing and Fine Arts.' 
(2) Yājñavalkya in his Smrti provides the following list of subjects of learning- 
पुराणन्यायमीमांसा धर्मशास्त्राङ्गमिश्रिताः । 
àçı: znana faenai adeu a agdu || 
C 
C 
where we find mentioned only Nyaya' and Mīmāmsā,' standing respectively for Reasoning and Investigation, 
גי 
2 
+ 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
(3) The Great Tachaspati Mishra (ninth century A.C.) is known to have written important works on all the Darshanas; he himself enumerates his works as- 
यन्न्यायकणिका' - तत्त्वसमीक्षा - तत्त्वविन्दुभिः । 
यन्न्याय' साङ्ख्य' योगानां वेदान्तानां 
निबन्धनैः ॥ 
where we do not find the mention of the regular Six Systems.' 
C 
(4) Rajashekhara-Kavyamimāmsā (tenth century A.C.) speaks of Vanmaya,' Literature, as consisting of Purana, Anvīkşiki, Mīmāmsā and Smrtitantra; where we miss the names of Sankhya, Yoga, Vedanta and Vaisheṣika. 
C 
(5) Jayanta-Bhaṭṭa in his Nyayamañjarī (tenth century A.C.) speaks of Sat-tarki,' the Six Theories'; but includes under the name, Mīmāmsā, Nyāya, Sānkhya, Arhata, Bauddha and Char- vāka. The names of l'edanta,' Yoga,' Vaisheşika' are absent 
here. 
C 
C 
(6) Vishvasäratantra-Gurugītā (twelfth century A.C.) speaks of the Six Systems,' as those of Gautama, Kanāda, Kapila, Patanjali, Vyasa and Jaimini Iere alone we find the well-known 
Six darshanas.' 
(7) Haribhadra Suri (twelfth century A.C.) mentions the following-Bauddha, Naiyāyika, Sänkhya, Jaina, Vaishēṣika and Jaimini; here we miss the names of Vedanta and Yoga.' 
C 
> 
C 
(8) Jinadatta Suri (thirteenth century A.C.) names the follow- ing- Six darshanas 'Jaina, Mimāmsā, Bauddha, Sänkhya, Shaiva and Nästika; here we miss the names of Nyaya, Vaishēşika, Vedanta and Yoga. 
(9) Rājashekhara Sūri (1348 A.C.) names Jaina, Sankhya, Jaiminiya, Yoga, Vaishēṣika and Saugata. Here we do not find the names of Vedānta and Nyāya. 
(10) Mallinātha's son (fourteenth century A.C.) speaks of Pāņini, Jaimini, Vyāsa, Kapila, Akṣapāda and Kaṇāda; here we miss the Yoga. 
Thus we find that till so late as the fourteenth century the name Sad-darshana,' Six Systems of Philosophy,' had not 
C 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPILICAL 
.00 
3 
become stereotyped as standing definitely and specifically for the Six Systems now known as Sänkhya, Yoga, Nyāya, Vaishēṣika, Mimāmsā and Vedanta. The old division was into the two broad lines mentioned by Yajnavalkya, under the names Nyaya' and Mīmāmsā,' the term Nyaya' stands for what we understand by Reasoning, Argumentation, and Mimämsä for Investigation, Deliberation. 
L 
The first step towards both these lay in the preparing of the ground for investigation; and it was necessary at the outset to lay down the means that are available to the investigator for knowing things; this was essential for all sound and valid knowledge,' which was the sole purpose of all Investigation. Thus it was that Nyaya,' Reasoning,' came in as the first essen- tial; and this is the reason why the consideration of the Means of Knowledge, Pramanas, became the starting point of our philo- sophical works. 
៩ 
4 
C 
C 
From the earliest times, man has made a distinction between Matter-regarded, roughly, as what is tangible, and Spirit- what is not tangible. Man has all along recognised this distinc- tion between the visible,' which meets the Eye, and the invisible,' which is beyond the reach of the senses and is yet felt to be there. This well-recognised distinction we find stressed in the system which we know as the Sankhya.' In the other group known as the Nyaya, we find expounded in detail the means and methods for the ascertaining of the real nature of things, both material and spiritual; this expounding is done on the basis of common- sense, and the aid of supernatural means of knowledge is not emphasised. The third group known as Mimämsä deals entire- ly with spiritual truths, which are not amenable to any ordinary means of knowledge-being cognisable only through the Reliable Word, Revelation. 
" 
4 
L 
It is not easy to find proper justification for the later rigid division into the Six Systems.' These Six Systems' have been held to be (1) Sankhya, (2) Yoga, (3) Nyāya, (4) Faishëṣika, (5) Mimāmsā, and (6) Vedanta. As a matter of fact, however, there is ample justification for the view that we have only three systems, and each of these three is presented to us in the form of a pair; each member of the pair being complementary to the other. 
4 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
4 
For instance, Sankhya and Yoga form one pair; the theoreti- cal philosophy is supplied by the former and the practical method of realising these philosophical truths are taught by the latter. It is for this reason that in the older literature, both of these have been called Sankhya'; and it was only later on, when people began to prefer analysis to synthesis, that the former came to be known as 'the Sankhya without God,' and the latter, as Sankhya with God,' the postulating of the Ishwara,' Lord, God, being the important point where the two sister-systems differed; though it was not noted that God had no place in the philosophy of the Yoga,-He being posited there only as the object of devotion and meditation, leading up to final Samadhi, Absolute Communion.-- The Nyaya and the Vaishesika form the second pair; though the case of these two is somewhat different from that of Sankhya and Yoga. The sutras of both Nyaya and Faisheşika contain philo- sophical matter; though even here much of the philosophical matter has been taken for granted by the Nyaya, as expounded in the sister-system; the Nyāya-bhāṣya has clearly declared that such of the Taisheșika doctrines as have not been actually denied in so many words by the Nyaya-sūtra should be taken to be accepted by the Nyaya-(Nyāya-Bhāṣya on 1.1.4.). That these two systems are mutually complementary is shown by the fact that the avowed aim of the Nyāya-sūtras is found to be the propounding of a scheme of investigation and discussion regarding philosophical truths; as in their opinion, knowledge acquired otherwise remains shaky until it is corroborated by such investigation and discussion. These two systems have, since early times, been coalescing to such an extent that it is sometimes difficult to ascertain whether a certain manual written during the last two or three centuries is to be classed as Nyaya or Vaishēṣika.'-Lastly, as regards the Mimämsä and the l'edanta, there has never been any justification for regarding them as two distinct systems of Philosophy.' They have always been, and continue to be, known as Purva' (Preliminary) Mīmāmsā and ‘Uttara' (Final) Mīmāmṣā. Pūrva- Mēmāmsā―i.e., Mimāmsā proper-has never claimed to be a Darshana,' a system of Philosophy. In fact, so far as the Sutra is concerned, it does not take cognisance of any philosophical topic except that of Pramana; and these also are brought in only nega- tively, to show that Dharma is not within the purview of the ordinary Pramāņas, Perception and the rest. The commentators 
C 
· 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
C 
5 
have introduced such topics as the Soul' and the Apurva,' but only as corollary to its main theme of Dharma,' Duty of Man; if there is no Soul and no Apurra, there can be no point in perform- ing Dharma, one's Duty; hence these have been set forth by the later exponents; the Soul has been specially emphasised; but re- garding any detailed investigation and consideration of this Soul, the older writers have deliberately referred the enquirer to the Vedanta.' Says Kumarila at the end of his Atmarada, in the Shlokavārtika- 
4 
C 
इत्याह नास्तिक्यनिराकरिष्णुरात्मास्तितां भाष्यकृदत्र युक्तया । 
दृढत्वमेतद्विषय: 
C 
gata: प्रयाति वेदान्तनिषेवणेन || 
The term Nastikya' (Atheism) in Indian Philosophy stands for the view that there is no Soul, there is no region other than the physical ' (vide Nyaya-Bhasya); subsequently it 
C 
came 
to stand for the view that there is no God.'-The term Vedanta' originally stood for the Upanisad-section of the Veda, the study whereof, as bearing upon the Soul and cognate subjects, is incor- porated in the Brahmasutras of Badarāyaṇa.-We are alive to the fact that later on differences cropped up between the two Mīmāmṣās '; but they always appertained to minor details; on the main issues, there has not arisen 
arisen any serious controversy. Vedanta proper finds its ultimate sanction in the Vedic texts, and as regards the authority and interpretation of these texts, it accepts the conclusions of the sister-system; in fact, for all prac- tical purposes, the Vedanta accepts the tenets of the Mimamsā; hence the statement by the Vedantin- Vyacahare Bhattanayah." 
[For examples of 1-8 adopted and used by Vedantins see the Last Chapter.] 
C 
The above facts also account for the designation of Mīmāmsā proper as Pūrea and that of Vedanta as Uttara. For the enquiry into Brahman-Brahmajijñāsā,—which can be carried on only on the basis of Vedic texts,-it is essential (a) that the authority and reliability of the Veda should be established beyond doubt, and (b) that certain methods of interpreting those texts should be elaborated, in order to avoid confusion in the course of the study of the vast mass of Vedic material. Both these require- ments have been met by Mīmāmsā proper; and it is on the basis of the Purva, Preliminary, Mimamsa that the Vedantin has 
6 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
raised the edifice of Vedanta proper, which, on that account, is called Uttara, Final, Mimamsā. And it is interesting to note that on the subject of the nature of the Soul and of Final Liberation, Moksa, the final aim of men, there is not much difference between the views of the great Mimāmsaka (Kumarila, for instance) and the Great Fedantin (e.g., Shankara). 
This interrelation and interdependence between the two Mīmāmsās has been clearly indicated by Shankaracharya, in his Shārīraka-bhāṣya, on Sutra 3.3.53. The Adhikarana beginning with this Sutra is meant to establish the existence of the Soul as something distinct from the Body. A preliminary objection is raised to the effect that "this matter has been already dealt with in the very beginning of the Shustra, where the Existence of the Soul as the Enjoyer of the results of acts has been established." And this objection has been answered by the following statement- "it is true that it has been so established by the Author of the Bhasya (Shabara), but nothing has been said on the point by the Author of the Sutra; while in the Vedanta-Sutras under explana- tion (3.3.53. et seq.), the Author of the Sutra itself has dealt with it directly; and it is clear that what Shabara Svāmi has declared in Adhyaya I of his Bhasya, he has derived from the present Vedanta-Sūtra itself; and it is for this reason that when the Revered Upavarṣa (the ' Vṛttikāra,' of Pūrva-Mīmāmsā) found it necessary, in course of his work on the First, Preliminary, In- vestigation, to prove the Existence of the Soul, he contented him- self by saying that he was going to explain this under the Shariraka (Vedanta-Sutra); in the present connection we are going to discuss the Existence of the Soul in relation to the Upasanas, acts of worship and meditation, that have been enjoined in the Veda; and we are doing this for the purpose of showing that the question of the Existence of the Soul has a bearing upon the entire Shastra -the whole Philosophy (of Mimāmsā, with its two parts, Karma or Purca, Mimämsä and Uttara Mimamsā).” 
- 
4 
C 
The words and expressions used in these passages are signi- ficant. (1) The Purva-Mimamsā has been referred to as Shastra- pramukha, Beginning of the Shastra ';-(2) it is again referred to Prathama-Tantra, the Preliminary Investigation ';-(3) the two Mīmāmsās together have been spoken of as Kṛtsna-Shastra,' 
the whole Philosophy.' 
* 
4 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
7 
The interdependence and interrelation of the two Mimāmsās is further indicated by the following facts:- 
(i) The immediate purpose of both the Mimāmsās was to save the Vaidika Dharma from the onslaughts of the Bauddha and other Non-Vaidika Dharmas. 
(ii) Kumārila holds that the Atman is eternal-different from the body, the sense-organs and Buddhi-(Shlokavārtika-Atma, 
7.) It is imperishable. (Ibid., 147.) 
(iii) Atman 
p. 516). 
is omnipresent (Tantravārtika-Translation, 
(iv) Atman is ' jñānashaktisvabhāva,' (of the nature of cons- ciousness), eternal, omnipresent. (Shlokavārtika—Atma, 73.) 
(a) Atman is of the nature of pure consciousness' (Tantra- vārtika-Translation, p. 516. Text, p. 381, 1. 5.) 
(vi) As regards the parama-puruşartha, summum bonum, and its attainment, Kumarila's view is thus summed up-(See Tantra- vārtika-Text, pp. 240-241, Translation, p. 321.) 
(a) Knowledge of Atman helps the Man, as also the sacri- 
ficial performance. 
C 
C 
C 
? 
C 
C 
(b) Such Vedic texts as- Ya ātmā apahatapapmā vijaro vimṛtyuḥ vishoko vijighitso'pipāsaḥ satyakāmaḥ satyasankalpaḥ so nrēstavyaḥ sa vijijñāsitavyaḥ,'- 
Mantavyo boddharyaḥ - Atmanamupasīta ' Sa sarrañshcha lokanapnoti tarati shokamatmavit '-' Sa yadi pitṛkāmo bhavati sankalpādēvāsya pitaraḥ samu- ttisthanti tena pitṛlokamabhisampadyate - Sa khalvevam yo veda, etc. etc.'-There are two kinds of aims attainable by man, Happiness and Final Deliverance (the Highest Good);-they are attained by means of pure self-knowledge obtained by means of Enquiry and Reflection;-the Highest Good' consists in absorption into the regions of Brahma.' 
C 
" 
C 
C 
Though what is said in Shlokavārtika (Sambandha-kṣepapari- hāra, 103-104) as to the knowing of Soul' not being enjoined for the purpose of Final Deliverance' would appear to be in- consistent with the above from Tantravārtika,-yet in reality it The explanation is given by the Nyayaratnakara, which says that there are two kinds of self-knowledge taught in the 
is not so. 
68 
30 
• 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Upanisads,- -one which discriminates the Itman from the Body, etc., and the other, which helps in Meditation, etc.-It is the former that is spoken of as not leading to Final Deliverance '; as its sole purpose lies in convincing the man that there is an ever-lasting Entity within him for whose sake the sacrifices are to be performed. That this is so is made clear by the statement that there is no other result save the attainment of Heaven.'- This apparently refers to the result of sacrifices. Certainly Kumārila cannot be taken as holding that there is no other result save Heaven; in several passages he has spoken of Mokṣa. The conclusion is that Moksa is attained through the second kind of 'self-knowledge.' 
C 
(ei) To crown all, we have the declaration at the end of Atmavāda in Shlokavārtika to the following effect- Thus has the author of the Bhasya, with a view to refute Atheism, established, by means of reasonings, the existence of Atman; conviction regard- ing this becomes strengthened by a careful study of the Vedanta.' 
Of course one cannot ignore the later controversies that arose between the followers of the two teachers: specially in regard to Karmakandai.e., the Vedic texts bearing upon the active aspect of Dharma,-which the later Vedantin insisted upon regarding as almost valueless,-quite unmindful of the fact that the Great Acharya has repeatedly asserted that the due per- formance of the said active aspects of Dharma is absolutely essen- tial-specially for the purification of the mind, without which no real progress can be possible towards the attainment of Iñana. In fact it was in this reconciliation between the two schools of thought that lay the value of the work of Shankaracharya, in whose system there is scope for both, within their own special spheres. The following passage from the Shārīraka-Bhāṣya (on Sú. 4.1.8.) clarifies the entire viewpoint of Shankaracharya. 
We accept as settled the following conclusion:-All acts of permanent obligation-accompanied Or not accompanied by knowledge-which have been performed before the rise of the ultimate True Knowledge, either during the 
present life or in previous ones,-all such works act as means of the extinction of evil dessert obstructing the attain- mient of 
True Knowledge,-and thus become the cause of such attainment, subserving the more immediate causes, 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
9 
such as Shravaṇa, Manana, etc. These Acts therefore operate towards the same ultimate result as the Knowledge of Brahman." 
As regards the special field occupied by Mimämsä proper, Jaimini in his Sutras has propounded the subject of his enquity as Dharma (Sūtra 1),-then he sets forth his idea of what Dharma (Duty of Man) is,-where we are told that it consists in what has been enjoined in the Veda as conducive to welfare (Sutra 2);-he then explains why the ordinary means of Cognition, Perception, Inference and the rest, cannot be of much use in this connection (Sūtra 4);--and how the Revealed Word can be the only infallible guide in this matter (Sūtra 5),--and proceeds in the rest of Pada i, to explain how and why the Revealed Word,' which is the Veda, is to be accepted as an infallible source of knowledge; this is followed in the rest of Adhyaya 1, by a detailed exami- nation of the question as to what portions of the Veda are to be regarded as actually laying down, enjoining, what should be done and what should not be done.--Having thus cleared the ground in the first Adhyaya, Jaimini proceeds, in the remaining eleven adhyāyas, to set forth in detail the methods of understanding the import of Vedic texts. 
* 
6 
It will be seen that for Jaimini-in fact for all Indian philo- sophers, the connotation of the term Dharma' is very much wider than that of its usual rendering, Religion '; it stands for the whole duty of Man, the performance of which is conducive to his welfare-here, in this world, during present life, as also else- where, after death. 
Unfortunately for us, the examples that Jaimini and his commentators chose for illustrating the rules of interpretation were all drawn from sacrificial rituals. Naturally, during their time, every serious student was familiar with these rituals and hence these were regarded as providing most suitable examples. Latterly, however, sacrificial ritual has gradually all but dis- appeared from the life of the Hindus; and this has led to the neglect of the study of the Mimāmsā-Shastra itself. Attempts were made off and on to illustrate the more important of Jaimini's Principles (Nyāyas) by means of examples drawn from the practices current among the later Hindus; and we have a number of manuals, called 'Adhikaraṇa-Kaumudi '—by Devanatha Thakkura and Rāmakṛṣṇa among others-where the Principles are illustrated by examples drawn from other fields of human activity.-All along 
F. 2 
10 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
however these Mimāmsā Nyayas have continued to exercise their due influence on other matters,-in fact, on all matters that are affected by the right interpretation of authoritative texts. This Ifas been specially manifested in the domain of Law; and decisions of even modern courts of law have been found to be influenced by these Nyayas of Jaimini. One glaring instance of the applica- tion rather misapplication-of one of these is afforded by the judgment of the Privy Council which has declared the adoption of an only son to be legal, on the authority (misunderstood) of a Mimämsä Nyaya. It is as follows:- 
C 
Gautama has declared-One should not give away, nor adopt, an only son,-because he serves the purpose of the perpe- tuation of the line of his ancestors.' This sentence contains two statements-(a) One should not adopt, or give away in adoption, an only son,' and (b) He serves the purpose of perpetuating the line'; the latter sentence is meant to provide a reason for the prohibition contained in the former statement. In a Bombay case, it was argued by an eminent lawyer, and the argument was ultimately accepted by the Privy Council,-that the first statement cannot be mandatory, because an injunction or a prohi- bition which is sought to be justified by reason cannot be manda- tory. In support of this view reliance was placed upon an adhikarana of the Purra-Mimämsä (Sūtra 1.2.27.) and the case was decided accordingly; the prohibition was not mandatory, hence the adoption of an only son is not illegal; ever since this view has prevailed. Even a cursory examination, however, of the Adhi- karana concerned will show that the legal authorities have entirely misunderstood the Nyaya concerned. What the Nyaya really stands for is that- When a certain sentence consists of two statements,-one in the form of an Injunction or Prohibition, and another in the form of a reason in support thereof,-no mandatory force attaches to the latter statement.'-That such is the Nyaya as propounded in Mimämsä can he found out by any one who comes to look into any of the authoritative works on Mimämsä— from Shabara downwards.-Incidentally it may be pointed out that the lawyers concerned did not take the trouble to find out if there were other texts bearing on the question. As a matter of fact, there is at least one other text which prohibits the said adoption-and does not adduce a reason for it. Shaunaka has declared - नैकपुत्रेण 
कर्तव्यं 
पुत्रदानम्प्रयवतः - ' The man with an 
" 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
11 
only son should carefully avoid the giving away of the son.' (Vide Hindu Law in Its Sources.) 
We thus see that there are no 'Six Systems of Indian Philosophy; there may be three; but they are all collectively con- ducive to the welfare of man. For instance, the Sankhya teaches men the first essential distinction between Matter and Spirit, and shows that the latter is the more important of the two, the former only subserving the purposes of the latter:-- 
पुरुषविमोक्षनिमित्तं तथा प्रवृत्तिः 
says the Kārikā. The Yoga provides the method duly leading to the realisation of this pre-eminent truth;-the Nyaya-Vaisheṣika provides the ratiocina- tive factor, the method of proving to the sceptic the correctness of the said distinction between Matter and Spirit; and finally, we have the two Mimāmsis which together lead us on to the realisation of the Highest Truth,-that all is one, there is no multiplicity or plurality, which is all purely illusory and so forth. The ultimate sanction for this Truth rests in, and is provided by, the Revealed Word of the Veda, and the exact import of this Word is under- stood with the help of certain broad principles expounded in the Purva-Mīmāṁsā-Sūtras. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE PURVA-MIMAMSÄ 
We have seen how and why it was found necessary to evolve a methodology for understanding the true import of Vedic texts. The earliest work that is available to us on this subject is the Sūtra of Jqimini. 
As regards the date of these Sutras, nothing definite can be known. These ancient Sutrakaras are found to be referring to each other; e.g., Jaimini mentions Badarāyaṇa (Mi. Sú. 1.1.5) and Badarayana mentions Jaimini (Brahma-Sutra 3.2.40). All attempts, therefore, that have been made to fix the dates, or coin the chronology of these systems have been futile and unconvincing. 
This work, as generally known to us, consists of twelve Adhyayas: but there is a belief,-which appears to have some foundation, that there are four more Adhyāyas of the Jaiminiya- Sutra' known as the Sankarṣa-Kända.' Indeed a work hear- ing this title was actually published at Benares in 1894; it con- 
12 
4 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
C 
sists of the Sutras of Jaimini-said to be Adhyāyas 13, 14, 15 and 16-along with a comparatively recent commentary called Bhāṭṭa- Chandrika, by one Bhaskara Bhatta. References to the Sankarṣa- Kanda' of Jaimini are found in Rāmānuja's Shrī-bhāṣya under 5.3. That this Sankarṣa-Kanda,' or simply Sankarṣa' as he calls it, was commented upon by Shabara is clear from the Shabara- Bhasya itself; under Su. 10.4.32 and 12.2.11, the Bhasya con- tains the words Sankarṣe vakṣyate,' and Sankarse vakṣyati.' On looking into the Sutras as printed in the Sankarṣa-Kanda, find that the first point of Shabara's reference (under 10.4.32) appears under Sutra 14.4.20. of the Sankarșa, where we meet with the Sūtra वनस्पतिस्विष्टकृद्विकारत्वात् and the words of Shahara under reference are स्विष्टकृद्विकारश्च वनस्पतिरिति सङ्घर्षे वक्ष्यते । The second point of reference. however, is not equally clear. The words of Shabara (under 12.2.11) are-qurui zagaruf 
- औषधार्था अवहननार्था वा यथा पत्नीति 
we 
f. In the Sankarṣa-Kända, the only passage relevant to this appears to be under 13.1.11. But the identity of these two is not quite clear. There is a manuscript of the Sankarṣa- Kanda in the Adyar Library-with the Bhāṣya of Dēvasrāmī. 
Anyway, this printed Sankarṣa-Kanda does not appear to bear any signs of being the उपासनाकांड, 'Section of Veda deal- ing with Worship and Devotion,' which the Editor, the late Mahā. P. Rāmamishra Shāstrī, calls it in the footnotes at the end of his edition of the Shastradipikā; wherein he quotes Rāmānuja's assertion regarding Jaimini's Sutra consisting of sixteen Adhyāyas; the four concluding ones apparently constituting the said उपासनाकांड. From the clear reference to the वनस्पतिस्विष्टकृत् noted above, the printed is, would appear to be the mentioned by Shabara, and the additional four Adhyāyas of Jaimini, mentioned by Ramanuja, must be totally different from the dis,—if it deals, as P. Rāmamishra says it 
does, with the उपासनाकांड. 
In fact, the printed commentary declares at the very outset as follows:-" In the foregoing twelve discourses the sage has expounded a few principles of interpretation, based upon the dis- tinction of acts into Primary and Secondary;' the following four discourses are going to bring together a few stray Vedic texts and determine their exact meaning by means of the 
C 
C 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
13 
same principles; hence (i.e., because these deal with stray texta), there is no need here to point out the contextual connection of each topic with what has preceded it."-Of the Sutras, however, the printed commentary provides the Pratikas, the opening words, only. 
An attempt might be made to obtain some idea of the con- tents of these four Discourses with the help of the printed com- mentary and also the older commentary by Dēvasvūmi, a manus- cript of which has been obtained from Madras, with the help of Dr. C. Kunhan Raja,-only if we could fix the text of the Sūtras also. 
4 
The Mimamsã-Grantha-Prakāshaka-Samiti of Poona is ad- vertising the publication of what it calls the Siddhanta-bhāṣya (Sankarṣa-Kanda).'-On enquiry we learn that this also is the com- mentary by Devaswami. 
C 
The twelve Adhyayas-styled Dvādashalakṣaṇi 'of these Sutras were commented upon by several writers; the oldest of these known to us-but by name only-and also by a detailed exposition of his views by Shabara,—is Upavarṣa, who has been reverentially spoken of by Shabara (and also by Shankarāchārya) as 'Bhagavan Upavarṣah.' This same Upavarṣa has been generally identified with the 'Vṛttākāra,' whose views have been set forth in detail in the Shabara-Bhasya; though doubts have been raised in 
raised in regard to this identification.-Other commentators, known to us NO far only by rame, as men- tioned in some of the more important works, are-(1) Bhartṛmitra; mentioned by the Nyayaratnakara of Parthasarathi and the Kashika of Suchorita Mishra, on verse 10 of the Shlokavārtika, and believed by my late revered tutor Mahāmahopadhyāya Pandit Chitradhara Mishra of Darbhanga, to be the earliest commentator on the Sutras;-(2) Bhavadāsa, mentioned by Kumarila in Shloka- vārtika 1.63;-(3) Hari, referred to in the Shastradipikā of Pārtha- sarathi under 10.2.59-60.-These, however, are known only by their names; the earliest commentary that has been available to us so far is that by Shabara or Shabara-svāmin, known to the world as Shabara-bhasya.' This is the work on which the entire literature of Purva-Mimāṁsā is based. 
C 
Shabara-svamin is known among Pandits as a senior contem- porary of the great Vikramaditya,' the founder of the Samvat 
C 
14 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
era, and hence believed as having lived in 57 B.C. Indeed they quote a Shloka which speaks of Shabara 
Vikramaditya- 
ब्राह्मण्यामभवद्वराहमिहिरो ज्योतिर्विदामप्रणीः राजा भतृहरिश्व विक्रमनृपः क्षत्रात्मजायामभूत् । 
वैश्यायां हरिचन्द्रवैद्यतिलको जातश्च शङ्कुः कृती: 
शूद्रायाममरः षडेव शबरस्वामिद्विजस्यात्मजाः ॥ 
' 
as the father of 
Here the persons spoken of as sons of Shabara are—(1) Varāúha- mihira, the great astronomer, from his Brāhmaṇa-wife, (2) King Bhartṛhari and (3) King Vikrama, from his Kshattriya-wife, (4) Ilarichandra, the great Vaidya and (5) Shanku, the learned, from his Vaishya-wife, and (6) Amara, from his Shudra-wife. The date of the astronomer Varālmihira, however, has been fixed by scholars to be somewhere in the fourth century A.D.-Vidyā- pati Thakkura, in his Puruşaparīkṣā, speaks of Shabara as the Guru' of Vikramaditya.-The name Vikramaditya' continues to be shrouded in mystery. The only conclusion, therefore, that we can come to is that Shabara lived before 400 A.D. This would fit in with his posteriority to Bhagavān Upavarṣa whose date is believed to be pre-Christian,-and priority to Prabhakara, Kumarila, Mandana and Shankara.-Under Sü. 6.1.12, Shabara has quoted the well-known textaf ya' निर्धनाः सर्व एव ते which occurs in Manarsmrti; this would make 
Shabara posterior to the Great Law-giver. 
Vidyapati has spoken of Shabara as the Guru' of Vikra- maditya; this would make him a resident of Ujjain. But from certain points gleaned from the Bhasya, he appears to belong to the North-Kashmir, or even Takṣashila.-[Vide Intro. to English Translation of Shabara-Bhasya by Ganganatha Jhā- Gaekwad Series, Baroda.] 
" 
It is this Shabara-Bhāṣya that has formed the basis and starting-point for all later Mimämsä works; well might Shabara, therefore, be regarded as the Father of Mimamsă-literature; he it was who seems to have systematised and co-ordinated the Sutras into Adhikaranas; we have to accept this as a settled fact, at least until we have discovered the earlier commentaries on the Sutra, by Upavarșa and others. Indeed Shabara had attained this position as early as the time of the Great Shankara, who quotes 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
C 
15 
his words as those of the Shastrabātparyavidah (Shariraka-Bhāṣya 1.1.4). 
The earliest commentaries on the Bhasya so far found are those by Prabhākara (also spoken of as Prabhākara-Mishra, and called Guru), and by Kumarila (also spoken of as Kumārila- Bhatta, or simply Bhaṭṭa). These two writers became the founders of two schools of Mimamsa,to which a third was later on added in the person of Murari Mishra. In Mimāṁsa-literature, the view of Prabhakara is generally referred to as Guru-mata,' that of Kumarila as Bhatta-mata,' and that of Murari Mishra as "Mishra-mata.' 
There are references to a Vārtikakāra in the works of 
Shālikanatha. This Vārtikakāra does not appear. to be Kumarila; he is evidently an older writer whose Vartika' has been referred to by Kumarila himself in the Tantravārtika (Text, D. 606); where a Vriti' also is mentioned. 
these two. 
C 
There has been some difference of opinion regarding the relative chronological position of Prabhakara and Kumarila,- Murāri Mishra being generally admitted to have lived long after The idea current among Pandits is that Prabhākara, along with Murāri Mishra, was Kumarila's pupil; and a story is told to the following effect: From his early age, Prabhakara had showed signs of keen intelligence and independence of judgment, and in course of study there arose a sharp difference of opinion Letween the pupil and the teacher on some matter relating to the After-death Rites; having failed to convince the pupil by argu- ments the Teacher had recourse to a stratagem; once in the mora- ing, it was given out that the Teacher had expired; when the people assembled for the purpose of the Rites, there arose a ques- tion regarding the proper manner of this performance; the matter was referred to Prabhakara, as the protagonist of one of the two views that had been discussed; and he readily said- Of course the view held by our teacher is the correct one; the other view had been put forward by me only for the purposes of discussion; thereupon Kumārila got up and said- So Prabhākara has been won over to my view;' whereupon Prabhakara retorted-' Yes, but not while you were alive.'-Another story:-In course of study, the Teacher came by a sentence — 'अत्रतुनोक्तं तत्रापिनोक्तम् इति द्विरुक्तम्; the apparent meaning of this was- This has not been mentioned 
C 
C 
> 
16 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
here, nor has it been mentioned there, so it has been mentioned twice'; and this was an absurdity which puzzled the teacher and the pupils alike; after some cogitation, the teacher retired to rest; before he returned Prabhakara put a mark between अत्र and तु and another, upon which altered the whole structure of the sentence अ'त्र' तुना' उक्तं तत्र' अपिना' उक्तम्' इति द्विरुक्तम्, which thereby was found to mean- Here this idea has been expressed by the particle and there the same idea has been expressed by the particle, hence it has been expressed twice;' when the teacher returned, he saw the marks and found the difficulty easily solved; and having found out who had supplied the key to it, he was very highly pleased and bestowed upon Prabhakara, the title of 'Guru.' - Another explanation of this title of Prabhi- kara's is not complimentary, being attributed to the complicated nature of his views, in the following verse current in South India- 
गाथा ताथागतानां गलति गमनिका कापिली कापि लीना क्षीणा काणादवाणी द्रुहिणहरगिरः सौरभं नारभन्ते । क्षामा कौमारिलो क्तिर्जगति गुरुमतं गौरवाद् दूरवान्तं का शङ्का शङ्करादेव जति यतिपतौ बद्धवेदी त्रिवेदीम् ॥ 
This tradition relating to the relationship between Kumarila and Prabhakara is found mentioned in the सर्वसिद्धान्तरहस्य of Shesa commented upon by his son Govinda who was a pupil of the Great Madhusudana Sarasvati,-where we read- 
अस्यां सूत्रं जैमिनीयं --- शाबरं भाष्यमस्य तु मीमांसावार्तिकं भाट्टं भट्टाचार्यकृतं हि तत् । 
तच्छिष्योऽप्यल्पभेदेन शावरस्य मतान्तरम् प्रभाकरगुरुश्चक्रे तद्धि प्राभाकरम्मतम् ॥ 
Prabhakara is believed by Prof. Keith and other scholars to have lived between 600 and 650 A.D. 
It is interesting to note that while the Buddhist writer Shantarakṣita, who lived in the eighth century, criticises in his Tattvasangraha and quotes extensively from Kumārila (and also criticises Uddyotakara, the author of the Nyayavārtika),– neither he nor his commentator makes any reference to Prabhakaru. 
CHAPTER I: 
INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
17 
Notwithstanding all this, however, the fact appears to be that Prabhakara was senior to Kumārila and the two were perhaps con- temporaries, and that for the following reasons:-(a) Internal evidence-Prabhākara's commentary on Shabara-Bhāṣya-known as Brhati-is a comment in the strict sense of the term; he does not criticise the Bhasya on any point, he simply puts forward the Bhāṣya-kāra's view as understood by himself. In fact, he does not criticise other views either, except in very few places. Kumarila, on the other hand, very frequently criticises and rejects the interpretation of the Bhāṣya-kāra and puts forth his own views; this he does in several places-in no less than seven places-in the first adhyaya itself; l'uda 2, Adhikarana (1) [Tantra- vārtika, Translation, page 32]; Pāda 3, Adhikaraņa (1) [Tantra- vārtiku, Translation, p. 116]; Pāda 3, Adhikarana (4) [p. 178]; Pada 3, Adhikaraya (5) [p. 207]; Pada 3, Adhikarana (7) [p. 227]; Pāda 3, Adhikarana (10) [p. 347]; and Päda 4, Adhikarana (1) [p.373];--also in Adhyaya III, Pada 7, Adhikarana (19) [p. 1643]. Under Adhyaya III, Pada 4, after Sutra 9, Kumārila has six Sutras embodying four Adhikaranas; these do not figure in the Bhasya, nor in the Brhati; nor does Ṛjuvimalā take any notice of these Sūtras. Under Su. 3.7. 39, 40, the Bhāṣyakāra's interpretation has been criticised by Kumārila; it has been adopted by Prabhakara (vide Bṛhati), and Ṛjuvimalā has answered the objection raised against the Bhasya by Kumārila. 
If Prabhakara had come after Kumarila, he would not have failed to defend the Bhasya against these strictures of Kumarila. As a matter of fact, however, he takes no notice of these strictures, or of the new interpretations put forward by Kumarila. On the other hand, Kumārila is found to be taking great pains to de- molish certain views, a few of which we find put forward in the Bṛhati: For instance-(a) under 1.2.31 (Tantravārtika, Trans., p. 54), Kumārila objects to the question of the Adhikarana being put in the form Are Mantras meaningless? and this is the form in which it has been put forward in the Bṛhati (in accordance with the Bhāṣya);—(b) under 1.3.2, according to Prabhākara (MS. 31b) [see note in Shabara-Trans., pp.90-91 the Vedic text in support of the Smyti is to be inferred; this is objected to by Kumarila (Tantra., Trans., p. 112);-and so on in other places. The only point where we have found Prabhakara combating a view propounded by Kumarila is ander: Sa. 01:2 Behatë MS., 
F. 3 
AST 
TY CA 
218 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
p. 64b). But in this connection also, it is noteworthy that the words in which the criticised view is expressed-which are apparently a quotation,-are very different from those employed by Kumarila (under 4.1.2); the words of Kumarila are- द्रव्यार्जने क्रतुविधानं स्यात्; while those found in Prabhakara are caca' racana' न' भवतीति' याग एव' न' संवर्तते and this view is combated by Prabhākara in the words - प्रलपितमिदं केनापि अर्जन स्वत्वं नापादयतीति प्रतिषिद्धम् This difference in the words shows that the person referred to by Prabhakara's is someone different from Kumarila. It is interesting to note that these very words of Prabhakara have been quoted in the Mitākṣarā with approval (p. 181 Ed. Setlur). 
In point of style also, Prabhākara's work shows distinct signs of being older than Kumarila's work. The style of Brhati is similar to that of the Bhasya-possessing the same natural grace, simplicity and directness, while that of Kumārila becomes rather diffuse and rich, very much like that of Shankaracharya. In Brhati we met with more of those flashy retorts and turns of idiom which characterise the earlier works, like those of Patañjali and Shabara; eg., अज्ञानकातर्यमायुष्मतः प्रदर्शितम् (p. 30b 1. 2 ) - श्रहो अनवस्थितनयनीतिज्ञो भवान् (32b 1 3 ) -- मूर्धाभिषिक्तं प्रामाण्यम् (32b, line 6)—veys Tanaıftaq: (35b, line 9). 
1. 
Under Sú. 3. 4, after Su. 9, the Tantravārtika has six Sutras, which are not found in the Bhāṣya; nor in the Byhati; and Kuma- rila has suggested several reasons for this omission in the Bhasya:-(1) the author of the Bhasya forgot to comment on these Sütrus; or (2) his comments on these have been lost; or (3) they have been intentionally omitted as they were not of much importance; or (4) he did not accept them as genuine, on the ground that they interrupt the desirable connection between Sutra 9 and Sutra 16. 
This last view has been controverted by Kumarila, at the end of Su. 9 (Tantravārtika, Trs., p. 1275). 
The studied omission of these Sutras by Prabhakara has been expressly noted by later writers; e.g., by Vidyaranya in his Viva- raṇaprameyasangraha (p. 4). 
The Rjuvimala also does not make any reference to these 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
19 
Sutras; it does not even seek to traverse the arguments that have been propounded by Kumarila in favour of their genuineness. 
C 
This is an indication of the fact that, though Kumarila knew of the omission of the Sutras by some commentators,' Prabha kara and his immediate followers have taken no notice of what Kumarila has said regarding them:-which points to the conclu- sion that Prabhakara lived before Kumārila. 
This question however of the priority or otherwise of Prabhā- kara to Kumārila is still far from being definitely settled. 
Some light appears to be thrown upon the question by a passage in the Sankṣe pashariraka (1. 271) which contains the expression प्राभाकरे च समये; this shows that the Prābhākara system was a well-recognised system at the time; the author Sarvajñatma was a pupil of Sureshvaracharya, the well-known disciple of Shankaracharya. Under the circumstances-(a) if the traditional equation of Surēshvara-Maņdaya is correct (which is doubtful), -and if Mandana was the pupil of Kumārila (which is not un- likely),-Prabhakara should be very much older than Mandaná and hence than Kumarila also. All this, however, is still problematical. 
Later researches carried on at the Madras University are beginning to point to the conclusion that Prabhakara, Kumarila and Mandana are not far removed in point of time-that all of them lived during the sixth-seventh centuries A.D. 
In this connection it is interesting to note that the Buddhist writer Shantarakṣita, author of the Tattvasangraha, who is be- lieved to have lived only about a century later, has quoted extensively long series of Karikas from Kumārila's Shlokavārtika, and criticises in detail the views embodied therein; while he no- where mentions Prabhakara either directly by name or by a reference to his distinctive views; he mentions and refers to Shabara frequently. It may be that the Tattvasangraha itself being entirely in the form of Karika, the author found it easier to quote from a work in the same form-as the Shlokavārtika is,- than from a prose work, like Prabhakara's Brhati. 
The only manuscript available of Prabhakara's work-the Brhati commentary on Shabara-bhasya,-extends to the middle of Adhyaya VI only. The Tarkapāda section has been published at 
20 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Benares, and also at Madras,-along with its extensive commentary, the Rjuvimala by Shālikanatha Mishra; who is believed to have been a direct pupil of Prabhakara himself; but this is doubtful. 
There is another commentary on the Sutras called 
नयविवेक 
by Bhavanatha Mishra, believed to represent the Prābhākara School. A manuscript of this work is available at the Sarasvati- bhavana, Benares, which is a transcript obtained from the Madras Oriental MSS. Library. One or two later Prabhakara works have also been printed at Calcutta-such as fa. The most im- portant of these is the प्रकरणपंचिका by शालिकनाथमिश्र, the author of 
fa (published at Benares). 
C 
Prabhakara's Brhati appears to have been spoken of as the 'Nibandha or Nibandhana,'-vide Shastradipika 2.1.1, where a passage from the Nibandhana' is quoted, and this is believed to be from the Brhati. In the only manuscript of the Bṛhatë, however, which has been found, we find that the colophon at the end of Pada 2 of Adhyāya 2, speaks of the work as quafagat #iniarrafaacù while that at the end of Adhyaya 3, it speaks of it as इति बृहत्याम्. 
It is interesting to note that this manuscript (in the Library of the Bengal Asiatic Society) bears the words-enfana- कवीन्द्राचार्य सरस्वतीनां 'प्राभाकरमीमांसायाम्' after the end of Adhyāya 8. So that the manuscript belongs to the collection of MSS. that belonged to Kavindracharya who lived at 
at Benares in the seventeenth century and obtained from the Emperor Shahjahan the remission of a certain tax that used to be levied on pilgrims to Benares. A list of this collection came into our hands in 1918; and it was published in the Gaekwad Oriental Series. This Karindracharya is believed to have lived on the other side of the Barna river opposite the site now occupied by the Queen's College and the Sarasvati-bhavana. 
Brhati quotes from Bhāravi's Kirātārjuniya-Kāvya: q: परमापदां पदम् (242). 
Kumārila's system-called the Bhatta System-is represented by the works of Kumarila himself; the best known of which is his extensive commentary on the Shabara-bhasya, which commen- 
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPITICAL 
21 
tary, as it has come down to us, consists of three parts-Part I, called the Shlokavārtika dealing with the Tarkapada Section; Part II, called the Tantravārtika dealing with Adhyaya I, Pada 2 to the end of Adhyaya III; and Part III, called the Tuptika, dealing very briefly with the remaining nine adhyayas.-The whole of these three parts has been published at Benares; and Parts I and II have been also translated into English, and the translation has been published by the Bengal Asiatic Society.- Kumārila is believed to have written a still more extensive com- mentary on the Bhasya, called the Brhat-tika: and also the Madhyamāṭikā; both these have been referred to by Krsnadeva in his Tantra-chūḍāmani,-where he remarks that Tantravārtika, otherwise called Tantrațākā,' is only a summary of the Bṛhat- tika. This Brhat-tika has also been referred to by Someshvara in his Nyayasudhā. 
4 
Kumārila quotes (in Tantravārtika, Text, p. 347) the gramma- tical dictum acceffaq adung' which is also found in the 
'करोतिरर्थेष्विव सर्वधातून् Bhaṭṭikarya, and also the well-known words vai fe arde¶ày qEDY PAC9za:$<CA: which are found in Kalidasa's Shakuntala;- 
this latter in Tantravartika, Text, p. 133. He 
He also wrote a commentary on the Manava-Kalpa-Sūtra; a facsimile of the manuscript of this work (India Office Library No. 17) was published in 1867 by Th. Goldstucker. 
Kumarila is believed, on good grounds, to have lived between 600 and 660 A.D. Prabhākara, according to Prof. Keith, who is convinced that he was senior to Kumārila, lived between 610 and 690 A.D. 
The earliest expositor of the Bhatta System hitherto known is Mandana Mishra (615–695), who wrote a commentary on Kumarila's Tantravārtika, which is mentioned in Shastradīpikā on 2.1.1; as also other important works-such as Vidhirivēka and Bhāvanārivēka (both published at Benares), and a résumé of the entire Sutra-Bhasya, named Mimämsänukramani (printed with a modern commentary in the Chaukhambha Series, Benares.) He also wrote the Vedanta text-book (pre-Shankara, apparently) Brahmasiddhi, on which Vachaspati Mishra wrote the commentary known as fer. The Vidhivivēka of Manilana, has been regarded as an important work, so much so that it has been honour- 
22 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
on 
ed by an extensive commentary by the great Vichaspati Mishra; this commentary is called Nyāya-Kaṇikā, which also has been printed along with the text at Benares.-Later on came Sucharita Mishra who wrote the Kashikā, a voluminous commentary on Kumarila's Shlokurartika; it is being published in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series.-Somewhat later came Parthasarathi Mishra; he wrote (1) the Nyāyaratnākara, a commentary Kumārila's Shlokavārtika, (2) the Shastradipika, an independent complete commentary on the Sutras, (3) Tantraratna, a commentary on Kumarila's Tuptika, and (4) the Nyayaratnamālā, an indepen- dent treatise, a Prakaraṇa-grantha, dealing with some selected topics. Long after him came Someshvara Bhaṭṭa who wrote the Nyayasudha, also called Trikaṇḍimāmāmsāmandana, better known as Ranaka, which is an extensive commentary On Kumārila's Tantravārtika. Earlier than all these appears to be Paritoșa Mishra, whose work, the Ajitā, appears to be a commentary on the Tantravartika: the Colophon speaks of it as "Nyayanibandha- tikā. A manuscript of this work is contained in the Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras. Many other works, too numerous to be named here, have been written and still continue to be written, on the Bhatta system. In addition to the Ranaka and the Ajita, we know of some other commentaries on the Tantra- vārtika—for instance, (1) Tautātimaṭatilaka by Bhaṭṭa-Bhavdeva, alias Balabalabhi-bhujanya (India Office Cat., p. 690), (2) Nyaya- parāyaṇa by Gangadhara Mishra (Govt. Sans. Liby., Benares); (3) Subodhui, by Annambhatta, son of Tirumatarya of Raghava- Somayāji family (Govt. Sans. Liby., Benares); (4) Mitākṣarā by Gopala Bhaṭṭa. 
Besides the above there is believed to have been another com- mentary on the Tantravārtika by Bhaṭṭa Umbeka (who has been identified by some people with Mandana and also with the poet Bhavabhuti), as observed by Kṛṣṇadeva in the Tantra-Chūdāmaṇi. Shāstradīpikā also refers (page 199, 2.1.1.) to Mandana as a com- mentator on the Tantravārtika. The said Umbeka is known 
known to have written a commentary on the Shlokavārtika also. The reference in the Shastradīpikā (2.1.1) may however be only to an explanation of the karika (of the Tantravārtika fa यद्यप्येषा न लक्ष्यते तथापि सर्वसामान्यरूपेणान्याऽवगम्यते । ) provided in course of a discussion in either l'idhiviveka or Bhāvanāṛicēka. 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
23 
Of the third school-that of Murari Mishra, called the Mishra- mata, much is not known except through references in other works. He appears to have struck out a fresh path in relation to certain important topics; which has led to the saying- 
मुरारेस्तृतीयः पन्थाः; the प्रथम and द्वितीय apparently being प्रभाकर and कुमारिल | 
C 
, 
Dr. Umesha Mishra, in his paper entitled Murārēstṛtiyaḥ- pantha', makes out that there have been five Murari Mishras' in Sanskrit Literature; one of them is the well-known Mimamsaka, who lived some time between the eleventh and twelfth centuries of the Christian era; no complete work of his is available; Dr. Umesha has come by two fragments of his gloss on the Mimamsā, Sutras (1) the Tripidi-nitinayana, dealing with Padas 2, 3 and 4 of Adhyaya I, and (2) the Ekadashādyadhikarana dealing with the question of Tantra-Ãrāpa dealt with under Adhyāya XI of the Sūtras. From these fragments, it is not easy to find out on what points Murari Mishra struck out his third path as distinguish- ed from the Prābhākara and the Bhaṭṭa. But from references to him found in several important works, it is found that the following are a few of the three points. (1) Murari, like Shankaracharya, regards Brahma as the only one Absolute Reality; but for practi- cal purposes, he admits of diverse Objects, Qualities, Time-substrata and Space-substrata;—(2) in the maker of the variety of cogni- tions, the opinion expressed by Murari is that Cognition is svataḥ- pramāņa, its validity not being dependent upon anything extra- neous to itself; and the very circumstances that bring about the Cognition also serve to establish its validity; (as pointed out in the Aloka of Pakṣadhara); his view on the point differs from the other two views. According to him the validity of the Cognition is apprehended by the Anuvyavasaya, Representative Cognition, that follows in the wake of every Cognition; like the Cognition, its validity is apprehended by the Mind itself,-according to Murari-Mishra ' says Vardhamana on Kusmāñjali (p. 219);- (3) in the matter of Error, Bhranti, his view appears to be the same as that of Kumarila;-(4) in regard to Causality, the Cause brings about the Effect by virtue of the Shakti, Potency, inherent in itself, according to Prabhakara and the other Mimamsakas; and according to the Naiyayika, the Cause must be something that is free from obstacles in the way of the appearance of the Effect. According to Murări, however, neither Potency nor Absence of 
24 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Obstacles can bring about the Effect; the Effect at a certain point. of time is brought about by something which is free from obstacles at that time; and the absence of obstacles is only a qualifying condition or adjunct of the Cause, it is not the Cause itself;---says Vardhamana in his Gloss on Nyayalilavati (pp. 62-64); (5) as regards the term ' Vaishvadeva,' according to Shabara, Prabhā- kara and Kumarila, this is the name of a particular sacrifice (Mi. Sūtra 1. 4. 13-16); but according to Murări it is only indicative of the Deitylishredera.' This view is found attributed to 'Mishra ' by Tardhamana on Tattvachintamani-Shabdanda, (pp. 702-704). 
In the following passage in his Aloka (Commentary on Tattra- chintamani; Fol. 15A-15B, Benares Sanskrit College Palm-Leaf MS.) Pakṣadhara Mishra has briefly brought out the distinction among the three schools of Mimāmsā in regard to the Validity of Cognitions" The upshot of the whole is that l'alidity consists in bringing about efficient and effective activity; and this condition is fulfilled under all the three views of the Mimamsakas accord- ing to all of whom the Validity of the Cognition is cognised by just those same circumstances by which the Cognition itself is apprehended; that is (1) according to the Guru-mata (Prabhākara) it is self-illumined, that is self-apprehended; (2) according to the view of Murari, it is apprehended by the subsequent anur yavasaya (Representative Cognition); and (3) under the Bhatta view, the Validity of the Cognition is apprehended through Inference (and Presumption) based upon the fact of the Cognition itself being apprehended. 
(१) गुरुनये स्वप्रकाशादिना, (२) मुरारिनयेऽनुव्यवसायादिना, (३) अहनये Maarlag #gfuenftar 
यावज्ज्ञानग्राहक सामग्री ग्राह्यत्वस्य सर्वसाधारणत्वात् ॥ 
In the literary history of Mimāmsā, there is an important factor which demands careful study, but which has not been studied so far; nor have we met with any materials that are essential for that study. In his Introduction to the Shloka vārtika (verse 10), Kumārila has said- Among people Mimamsã has been made almost heretical (unorthodox, materialistic); I have made this effort to bring it to the path of Orthodoxy'; and on this Nyāyaratnākara remarks-Mimämsä, without being really un- orthodox, has been made so by Bhartrimitra and other writers, who have held out wrong doctrines, such as that no desirable 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
25 
results follow from the performance of the acts that are laid down as compulsory, nor any undesirable results from the acts that have been forbidden. 
Hitherto however we have not come across any of those works by Bhartrimitra and others. From the remarks of the Nyāya- ratnākara it would appear as if all these came before Kumārila. 
The Kashika (on Shlokavārtika 1. 10) mentions Bhavadasa in several places-pp. 13, 16, 21 (Trivandrum series). 
F. 4 
CHAPTER II 
PHILOSOPHICAL TOPICS: SOUL 
Before plunging into the question of the Means of Cognition, which as we shall see later on, leads on directly to the special content of the Purva-Mimāmsā Shāstra,-we shall deal briefly with some of the more important Philosophical Topics which, as remarked above, have been incidently dealt with by writers on the Shastra. 
ATMAN-SOUL. 
It becomes necessary for the Mimamsaka to posit the Atman, Soul, as something distinct from the Body; because without some such entity ensouling the Body there would be no sense in the Vedic texts that speak of the performer of a certain act going to Heaven,' or 'becoming liberated,' and so forth. 
" 
We shall see what (1) Shabara, (2) Prabhakara and (3) Kumārila have said in regard to this Soul. 
( 
We have selected these three writers as representing the three main schools of Purva-Mēmāmsā (1) The Bhasya,' (2) the 'Bhāṭṭa' and (3) the Prabhākara.' For the school generally known as the Third Path' : ' associated with the 
'di: name of Murări Mishra, and hence called Mishra-mata,' material is not yet available for a full account. 
< 
C 
C 
In addition to these, wheresoever we have been able to as- certain the Mishra-mata' from fragments of Murāri-Mishra's work, we have inserted a few notes here and there. 
< 
C 
(A) ATMAN,' SOUL, ACCORDING TO SHABARA. 
The Vedic text has spoken of the sacrificer equipped with the sacrificial implements proceeding to heaven '; and the oppo- nent has argued that here we find the Veda making an absurd statement; hence the Veda cannot be a valid source of knowledge. It is argued that what is equipped with sacrificial implements is the physical body, and as the body is entirely burnt up by cremation, it cannot proceed to heaven.'-Our answer to this is that what is spoken of here as equipped with the implements 
< 
26 
" 
CHAPTER II: PHILOSOPHICAL TOPICS: SOUL 
" 
27 
is not only the physical body, but also that entity which ensouls the body and to whom the body belongs . . The presence of such an Ensouling Entity is inferred from the phenomena of breath- ing, winking of the eyes and the like, which cannot belong to the body, as they are not found after death,-though the body is. there all right. Secondly, such phenomena as the feelings of pleasure, pain and the like are cognised by the person himself only, while the qualities of colour and the rest which belong. to the physical body are cognised and perceived by others also, who have no direct cognition of the feelings of the other person. This shows that there are certain qualities in the person which are directly cognisable by himself only.-From the fact of there being certain qualities of the person which differ radically from the qualities that belong to the physical body, we conclude that the entity spoken of as equipped with the sacrificial imple- ments' and as going to heaven is other than the physical body. 
4 
This argument is met by the opponent by the statement that the niere presence of the feelings and cognitions of pleasure can- not justify the conclusion that there is a distinct Entity to whom these belong, in which these subsist; in fact these feelings and cognitions do not necessarily presuppose a feeler or cogniser; the Cognition itself may be regarded as all-in-all. 
The answer to this is that the Act of Cognising presupposes an Agent who does that act; and an Agent must be an Entity distinct from the Act itself. And it is this Agent of the act of Cognising, Desiring and the like which we call Soul,' Atman. 
a later 
Similarly with Remembrance; it is only when one sees a thing on one day that he has the remembrance of it on day; and the recognition appears only in an Entity that has continued to exist all the time; and this can only be the Soul. 
This Soul, the Cogniser, the Agent of the acts of Cognising, Desiring, Feeling and the like can be directly cognised by each man for himself; it is in this sense that the Soul is regarded as Sva-samvedya,'' self-cognised'; and no Soul can be directly cognised by another. And yet it can be expounded to another, in the manner described in the Upanisads-' Neti-Neti,'' This Soul is not this, not that.' Thus it is that the existence of the Soul is taught by this pointing out that it is not-desire, not-feeling and so forth. And when one becomes cognisant of his own self-lumi-28 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
nous Soul, he infers the presence of similar souls in other persons also. 
This Soul is everlasting,-a Person or Personality apart from Pleasure etc. and the Cognitions. It is, in terms of the Brāhmaṇa, ' indestructible, not liable to disruption; but it comes into contact with perishable things, like Sense-organs, Merit, Demerit and so forth (Shatapatha Brā. 14.7.3.15).-(Shabara-Bhāṣya— Tr. pp. 26-31.) 
(B) PRABHAKARA'S VIEWS OF THE 'SOUL '. 
[The references are to the Madras Edition of the Bṛhati.] 
According to Prabhakara,the Soul is of the nature of the (A) Doer and Experiencer (p. 235-7); (B) it is something entire- ly different from the Body, the Sense-organs and Buddhi (p. 231); (C) it becomes manifest in all Cognitions,-(D) it is eternal (p. 235); (E) omnipresent (p. 235); and (F) many, one in each body; (G) it rests upon the notion of 'I,' entirely free from any notion of this or that' (p. 239); its existence is proved by the universally admitted and undenied and undeniable notion of I,' which is self-luminous (p. 245), in the sense that it is realisable or cognisable by each man for himself. 
' 
The following systematic account of the Prabhakara view we gather from Prakaranapañchikā: 
That the Cogniser is something different from Buddhi (Mind) is proved by the fact, among others, that Buddhi is inert and absent during sleep, and yet there are Cognitions during sleep. [Buddhi is the same as Manas, Mind, says Ṛjuvimālā on Bṛhati, p. 75.] 
The Sense-organs cannot be regarded as the Soul; because we often perceive a single object by more than one Sense-organ,-e.g., touching the same object that is seen; which shows that the factor that perceives-i.e., the perceiver-which is common to the two perceptions, -is different from the two organs concerned. Then again, it is found that the blind man remembers the things he had seen in the past when he was not blind; which proves that the perceiver is different from the organ concerned. Lastly, the Body can never be accepted as the Cogniser; because it consists of the Earth and there is no cognition or consciousness in parti- 
CHAPTER II: PHILOSOPHICAL TOPICS: SOUL 
29 
eles of Earth. The term Soul' too can be applied to that only which is endowed with intelligence, and the Body is not endowed with intelligence; the sole criterion for this lies in our own con- sciousness; as a matter of fact we actually have the consciousness of things past and future also; hence it cannot belong to any objects that are perceptible by the senses. 
If the Soul were the only source of all cognition, then as the Soul is everlasting, cognitions also would have to be regarded as everlasting; which is absurd. Hence philosophers have held that while the Soul is the basic (according to some, the material or constituent) cause of Cognition, it needs the help of other auxi- liary causes; and as such an auxiliary, Prabhakara posits the the Contact of the Soul with the Mind; this contact being brought about by a certain action of the mind, dus either to the effort of the Soul or to the Unseen Force of the previous activities (Karma) of the Soul; these efforts and Unseen Forces also being the effects of previous Mind-Soul contacts; and so the infinite cycle goes on. This Mind-Soul contact is not the only cause of our cogni- tions; if that were so, then the perception of colour would be possible for the Blind also. Hence the operation of the Sense- organs also has to be admitted. Even so, it is the Mind-Soul Contact that is the cause common to all Cognitions. 
Thus then, the Soul is the Agent, enjoyer, (bhokta) of experience (p. 232); the Body is the abode or receptacle of experi- ence; the organs are the instruments of experience; and the objects of experience are of two kinds-internal, in the shape of Pleasure, Pain and the like,-and external, in the shape of the Earth and other things;-the Experiencer consists of pure Con- sciousness. It is in these five that all truth is centred; there is nothing beyond these five; they comprise the Universe. 
Though the Soul, the Agent, enters as a necessary factor into every act of Cognition, it is not itself amenable to any of the ordinary means by which things are cognised. The Soul is self- luminous; in this sense it is cognisable by each man for himself. 
The existence of the Mind is proved by the manifestation of the qualities of the Soul itself. These qualities are-Buddhi (Intellection, Cognition), Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion, Effort, Destiny and Faculty. The existence of Buddhi is self- manifest, in the form of Cognition and Remembrances; Pleasure, 
30 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
an 
a 
Pain, Desire, Aversion and Effort are apprehended by mental Perception. By Faculty (Samskāra-Impression) is meant certain power or capacity imparted to the Soul by its Cognitions; its existence is proved by the fact that unless we have some such force intervening between the Cognition of object and its Remembrance, we cannot account for this latter. As for Destiny, it always takes the form of Merit and Demerit; whose real char- acter can be known only from the scriptures, which alone are the safe guide as to what is Right and what is Wrong. As pointed out above, all our Cognitions are not due to Mind-Soul contact only; if it were so, then the Blind man would also cognise colour; the function of the Sense-organs comes in here; and as all per- ceptible things fall within five well-defined classes, we posit five Sense-organs. These five, along with the Mind, which may be regarded as the Universal or Common perceptive organ, form the six Sense-organs, of which the Body is the abode. These organs are the Visual Organ (Eye), the Gestatory Organ (of taste), the Auditory Organ (Ear), the Tactile Organ (of touch), the Ol- factory Organ (of smell). (Prā. Mī., pp. 76-77). 
That the Mind is a substance is indicated by the fact of its having contracts with the Soul and with the Objects of Cognition. It cannot be regarded as made up of many component particles; as that would involve many unnecessary assumptions. Then again as the Soul is omnipresent and without parts, if the Mind also were of the same character, then, either there would be no contact between the Soul and the Mind, or such contact would be everlasting. Hence the Mind is regarded as of Atomic Dimen- sion. And as it exists, and yet has no cause, it must be eternal. It is extremely mobile, as is proved by the very swift contacts formed by it, at the time that we have one perception following another in quick succession, which must be due to the Mind coming into contact with one perceptive organ after another. Unless aided by the Mind, no organ can apprehend its object, as is found in the case of the absent-minded man who fails to see things before his eyes. The contact of the Mind with the con- scious Soul is due to the endless series of Merit-Demerit,-the accumulated effects of the past acts of the individual Soul con- cerned. (Prabhā. Mi., pp. 77-78.) 
The Cognition of the Soul itself proceeds from the same 
CHAPTER II: PHILOSOPHICAL TOPICS: SOUL 
31 
source as the Cognition of any other object. But here a distine- tion is drawn. Though the Soul is manifested in every act of Cognition, it is not the object of that Cognition; it appears only as the Nominative Agent, namely, the Cogniser, the bhokṭā, the Experiencer; it is not the object of the act of Cognition, because the operation of that act does not fall upon it. The Soul thus is the substratum of the Cognition which is self-luminous, and into which the Soul enters as the Cognitive Agent, the I,' the Bhokta, Experiencer, which is inseparable from all Cognitions; and hence like Cognition, the Soul also is self-luminous. Each man cognises his own Soul for himself-this is its स्वयं ज्योतिष्ट्व 'self-luminousness.' This is made clear by Kumarila also in Shlo. Va. Atma., 145.-The Cognition of other Souls is obtained by means of Inference. 
C 
The Cognition of the Soul being thus obtainable only as a factor in the Cognition of things,-it is natural that during deep sleep, when there is no Cognition of things, there should be no idea of the Soul. During the Turiya-Fourth, highest,-state of consciousness, however, the Soul is cognised, but only as pure Esse or Being, the substratum of the comprehensive cognition of all things, but free from and beyond all perceptible things. This is how it continues to exist after Liberation-a mere Esse. 
Not having been produced by a cause, the Soul must be imperishable, eternal; appearing during worldly existence, in every act of Cognition, as the Cogniser and Erperiencer,-and after Liberation, as pure Esse, Being. 
The Soul again is omnipresent-all-pervading, like Akasha; but its properties-Pleasure, Pain and the rest--cannot become manifest except in a body; as such manifestation requires Mind- contact, and the Mind subsists in the Body. Even though omni- present, the Soul cannot experience what is occurring in the Body of another personality, because experience is always due to the Karma of the particular Personality; hence the experience of one personality cannot form the experience of another. 
This Soul is distinct in each body; hence there are many Souls; as many Souls as there are conscious bodies. There are two reasons propounded in support of this view. (a) In the case of other personalities, we infer the presence of the Soul from certain activities manifested therein, which cannot be other- 
32 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
wise accountable, and we always feel that this Soul in the other personality is not-my-soul; what we feel is that just as certain activities of my body are rendered possible only by the presence of the Soul, so also similar activities in the other body must indicate the presence of a Soul there. The activities of an- other personality are never recognised as one's own activities. (b) We always find a clear difference between Merit-Demerit and the resultant pleasure and pain of different personalities; and all these are qualities of the Soul; consequently, if there were only one Soul, the same in all persons,-its qualities also would be the same in all the bodies ensouled by it; and then the Merit- Demerit and Pleasure and Pain of one person would be the same as those of another. 
C 
Prabhakara has an interesting note towards the end of the section of Byhati dealing with Soul (p. 256). It is true, he says, that the notions of 'I' and 'mine' imply a misconception,-an idea, as Soul, of what is really not-Soul';-but this assertion of this fact can come only from persons who have shaken off all impurity, and not from those who are still addict- ed to Action; that is why the Blessed Lord has declared (in (Bhagvad-Gita)- One should not divert the notions of the ig- norant who are addicted to Action ';-that is the reason why the Bhāṣyakara (Shabara) has not dealt with this question; as it was not his business to deal with people who have transcended Action. 
(C) KUMARILA'S VIEWS OF THE SOUL '. 
The Veda speaks of the Sacrificer' going to heaven' after death; the body perishes after death; hence the Entity that is spoken of as proceeding to Heaven 
proceeding to Heaven' must be something other than the perishable body. This entity is the Soul. If there is no such entity, then the Veda has made an absurd statement; this strikes at the reliability of Veda; and hence at the very root of all orthodox' philosophy.-(Shlokavārtika-Atmavāda, 1-5.) This Soul is something distinct from the Body, the Sense-organs and Buddhi; it is eternal (7), imperishable (147);-it is the real loer of action, agent of acts, and the experiencer of their results and reactions (8);-it is also all-pervading (20); we regard it so, because we find it functioning everywhere; that is, the notion of 
CHAPTER II: PHILOSOPHICAL TOPICS: SOUL 
33 
'I' which is all the notion that we have of the Soul, always in- dicates the notion of the Soul, which is of the nature of pure Consciousness, and is not qualified by any limitations of time and place. (Tantravārtika-Trans., p. 516). It is the Soul that passes through the experiences of Pleasure, Pain, etc. (Shlo. Va. Atma., 26; Tantravārtika, p. 516); and yet it never renounces its own character of consciousness; it forms the constant factor in all those variable and varying experiences. (Shlo. Va. Atma., 26. 28); the Soul experiences the reactions of all acts (290). If the Soul consisted of Consciousness, not in its eternal form, but in the form of fleeting cognitions, then it would not be possible to account for the activities of man, Or even the phenomenon of rebirth (34). It is necessary, therefore, to regard the Soul as being of the nature of Consciousness, eternal, omnipresent, capable of ensouling several bodies (73); it is itself conscious, as otherwise, it would not be the experiencer; it is omnipresent, as otherwise, it could not occupy one body after another, which it does even without any locomotion (Nyāyaratnākara). Though in the performance of the ordinary acts in the world, the Soul is the doer, Agent, only indirectly through the body, there are certain acts such as those being (existing), knowing and the like, of which it is the doer or Agent, directly by itself (Shlo. Vā. Ātma., 76). The Soul is (Aham-pratyaya-gamya), i.e., apprehensible by the notion of 'I' (107); that is, the notion of 'I' that we have in such ideas as I know' indicates the Knower, the Cogniser; who, there- fore, forms either the object or the substratum of that notion (110); the cogniser is always cognisable by--i.e., the object of-the notion of 'I' (126), which enters into all acts of Cognition. The idea that there is no Soul' is thus contrary to, and is set aside by, the universally recognised notion of I.' The positive argu- ments in support of the notion have been set forth in the Shlo. Va. Atma., 136-139. 
C 
C 
C 
臧 
The question arising-" if words are incapable of bringing about the cognition of the Soul, by what means is it cognised? -the answer given by the Bhāṣya is that it is illumined '-made cognisable, by itself '; and what is meant by self-luminosity' is that one Soul cannot be directly cognised by another Soul (Shlo. V'ă. Atma., 142-143),-it is cognised by another only through Inference, drawn from the perception of such activities in the other personality as have been found, in one's own Soul, to be 
F. 5 
34 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
but 
invariably concomitant with the Soul. It is clear, therefore, that for such person, his own Soul is Self-luminous, Self-cognised; for other persons, it is cognised through Inference.-(Shlo. Var. Atma., 145.) 
The Tantravārtika (Trs., pp. 518-522) deals at length with the question of the omnipresence of the Soul. (a) The Soul being itself immaterial, cannot move from place to place; when there- fore a man moves from one place to another, his Soul would be left behind; and the body would become soul-less and hence in- animate. But if the Soul is omnipresent, wherever the body goes, it finds itself ensouled by the Soul; the connection of one Soul with one body at a time being determined by the past Karma of the Soul which is always equipped with a body that is capable of bringing about the experiences resulting from that past Karma of the Personality. This continuous connection of the Body with the Soul is exactly like the continuous connection of the Body with Space or Time, which latter also are omnipresent. (b) If the Soul were not omnipresent, it would be either atomic in size or of the size of the body. It cannot be the former; as, if it were so, the person could be conscious of only those sensations that would appear in that small part of the body which would be occupied by the atomic Soul; which is absurd. If, on the other hand, the Soul were regarded as being of the same size as the Body, this would involve many gratuitous assumptions; such as that the Soul has parts, those parts are immovable, there is a conglomera- tion of such parts, and even though with parts, the Soul is eternal (which is admitted by the protagonists of this view), that the Soul moves from one body to another after death, and that there is some internal connection between its departure from one body and entrance into another. 
Even though omnipresent, one Soul cannot serve the pur- pose for all personalities, as that would mean that one and the same Soul undergoes the experiences of all persons. The Soul, therefore, must be regarded as many and existing simultaneous- ly. Being immaterial, they would not come in each other's way. In fact it is on account of this immateriality and consequent in- divisibility of Souls and their omnipresence,-and on account of all being of the same nature of pure Consciousness,--that the Upanisad-texts have spoken of all Souls as one. (Tantra Va., 
CHAPTER II: PHILOSOPHICAL TOPICS: SOUL 
35 
pp. 518-523). Though Jñāna, Cognition, involves some sort of for the Soul, this does not militate 
faf, modification, विक्रिया, 
against the eternality of the Soul itself. (Shlo. Va. Pratyakṣa., 52-53.) 
CHAPTER III 
LIBERATION 
A. LIBERATION OF SOUL-MOKSA. 
We do not find anything in regard to the details of Libera- tion in the Bhāṣya, and it has been explained by Prabhākara that Shabara was dealing with the subject of Karma, Action; hence he confined himself to what benefits the man addicted to Action, not the man who has washed off his impurities and renounced all Desire and Action; hence he has not gone forward to deal with the subject of Renunciation and Liberation. This is in strict accordance with what has been taught in the Bhagvad-Gitā to the effect that- One should not disturb the ideas of people addicted to Action.' (Bṛhati, p. 250.) 
B. LIBERATION ACCORDING TO THE PRABHĀKARA. 
The view of Prabhakara himself we have no direct means of ascertaining, as, like Shabara, he does not deal with people who have transcended Karma or Action. His followers' views on the subject we learn from the Prakaraṇapañchikā (p. 156). Accord- ing to these views, Liberation consists in the disappearance of all Merit and De-merit (resulting from Actions). It is on account of Merit and De-merit accruing to the Soul that it is born in the physical body; consequently when all Merit and De-merit have disappeared, there remains nothing that could lead the Soul to be born again in a body; and when the Soul ceases to have con- nection with bodies, and hence also with the Sense-organs, etc., all its metempsychic troubles are ended and it is free, liberated. As to how all this comes about, the following explanation has been provided:-(1) First of all, the man becomes disgusted with the troubles that he has had to undergo during his life on the earth; (2) finding the pleasures of the world also to be invariab- ly accompanied by some sort of pain, he comes to lose all interest in, and longing for, pleasures also; (3) he thereupon turns his attention towards Liberation; (4) he ceases to perform such acts as are prohibited and which lead to trouble, as also those that are prescribed only as leading to some sort of happiness here 
here or hereafter; (5) he attenuates all previously acquired Merit and 
36 
CHAPTER III: LIBERATION 
37 
De-merit by undergoing the experiences resulting from them; (6) he destroys the sole receptacle or abode of his experiences by the knowledge of the Soul, as aided by such qualities as Con- tentment, Self-control and so forth, all of which are laid down in the scriptures as tending to put a stop to the further return of the Soul into this world; it is only when all this has come about that the Soul becomes free, liberated. 
( 
All this may appear to be inconsistent with Prabhākara's own declaration (in Bṛhati, p. 235) to the effect that the Soul is purely the actor and experiencer'; which apparently means that there is no freedom for the Soul from Action and Experience, so that there can be no Liberation. But there is no real incon- sistency; like Shabara, Prabhākara has confined himself to the Man of Action-i.e,, the Soul engaged in activity, and has taken no notice of one who has transcended Action. 
Shankara Mishra in his Fädivinoda (p. 40) has the follow- ing note:-According to Prabhākara, Liberation is the Praga- bhāva--absence before appearance of Pain along with the total absence of Pain; that is a state in which there is no Pain and no likelihood of (appearance) of Pain. This is the view of Vallabha- charya also. According to Bhatta, Liberation consists in the appearance of everlasting Happiness. According to Tridandin it consists in the fusion of the Jivatman into Paramātman. Accord- ing to Shankaracharya, it is the direct realisation, Sākṣātkāra, of the non-duality of Brahman. 
He goes 
on to remark that according to the Tālāvatā, as according to the Mimāmsaka, there is no possibility of all personalities ever attaining Mokṣa. 
C. LIBERATION ACCORDING TO KUMĀRILA. 
The Bhāṭṭa view of Liberation is summed up in Shloka- vārtika (Sambandhākṣepa-parihāra, 108-110) thus: "For those who have understood the real nature of the Soul, all their past Karma having become exhausted through experience, and there being no further Karmic residum left to wipe off, there comes no further body; as it is only for the experiencing of the reactions of past Karma that the Soul is burdened with the Body; there- fore the seeker for Liberation should not do any such act as has been forbidden or even what has been enjoined for certain pur- poses; as both these would bring about Karmic reaction which38 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
would have to be expiated by experience); but he should continue to perform the compulsory acts, as the omission of these would involve sin, which would have to be expiated by painful experience through a physical Body." The 
The Nyayaratnākara and the Kushika (Shlo. Va. Atma., 106) go on to add-" Liberation must consist in the destruction of the present body and the non-pro- duction of the future body." 
C 
as 
Knowledge is not the direct cause of Liberation, which is purely negative in character; all that Knowledge does is, as shown above, to lead to the stoppage of further embodiment of the Soul; it cannot lead to the expiation of past karma, which can be brought about only by experience. There is no means of know- ledge, Pramāņa, indicating Knowledge to be the cause of Liberation. The Veda also does not enjoin knowledge leading to Liberation. The injunction that 'the Soul should be known is not meant for the purposes of Liberation; in fact all that the knowledge of the Soul does is to bring about the activity of man towards acts conducive to results which accrue only to a lasting entity like the Soul,-such results, for instance, as Heaven and the like; apart from these latter, there is no result that follows from the Knowledge of the Soul. If Liberation is re- garded as consisting in the experiencing of pleasure, then it is only a form of Heaven '; but Heaven being something transient, such Liberation cannot be lasting. effect that is brought about by a cause must be evanescent. Hence we conclude that when all Karmic residua have become exhausted, and there is no further Body for the Soul,-such a Soul becomes liberated through the mere fact of there being no cause left which could bring about a Body for such a Soul. There can be no justifica- tion for Liberation being regarded as ever-lasting, permanent, except the fact that it is purely negative in character. (Shloka- vārtika-Sambandhākṣēpaparihāra 101-107.) 
An 
Thẻ Shāstradīpikā (p. 145) is not sure regarding this being or not being Kumarila's own opinion,' Svamata. 
The Nyayaratnākara (on 102 above) explains that there are two kinds of Soul-Knowledge: -(1) Knowledge of Soul as an entity distinct from the Body, etc.; and (2) that Knowledge which takes the form of worship and meditation; it is the former Knowledge that is meant by Kumarila when he says that, it has 
CHAPTER III: LIBERATION 
39 
not been enjoined as leading to Liberation. The other kind, in the form of Worship and Meditation, does lead to Liberation. 
This view appears to have the direct support of Kumarila also, who says:- 
'As for the Knowledge of the Soul, it is both Kratvartha— helpful to the Sacrifice, and Puruşartha-helpful to man; in as much as, unless one knows the Soul, he cannot undertake the performance of a sacrifice which is laid down as leading to results after death; and we find such Vedic texts as- The Soul, free from evil, is to be sought after, etc., etc.,'-which lay down the Knowing of the Soul as to be acquired through reflection, etc., and as leading to both kinds of results-Happiness and Libera- tion. Then again there is the text--" He obtains all desires and passes beyond all sorrows," which speaks of all the eight mystic Perfections (of Yoga) accruing to the person knowing the Soul; and then lastly there is the text-"Passing his life thus, he reaches the regions of Brahman and from there never returns," which directly speaks of Liberation (as 
(as resulting from Soul- Knowledge)'.—(Tantravārtika-Translation, p. 321, under Sû. 1.3. 
. 
Adhikarana, 9.) 
CHAPTER IV 
BODY, SENSE-ORGANS AND MIND 
(A) ACCORDING TO PRABILĀKARA. 
The Body, as we have seen above, is the abode of the Sense- organs. There are three kinds of Body-(1) Womb-born, (2) Egg- born and (3) Sweat-born. The Prabhakara does not admit of the Vegetable Body, on the ground that we have no proof for the view that vegetable organisms are endowed with the six sense- organs; nor does he admit of any bodies not made up of Earth. According to him two organs-the Mind and the Tacticle organ -are present in all bodies. 
The following questions have been discussed in Prakaraṇa- pañchikā (p. 52 et. seq.)-(a) How is the existence of the Sense- organs proved? (b) What reasons are there for postulating the number as six only? 
The answer provided to these questions contains an analytic account of the whole process of Perception. Hence it will be found under "Perception " (below). 
The Mind is a Substance; otherwise there could be no contact between Mind and Soul or of Mind with Objects of Cognition. The Mind is not all-pervading; if it were, Mind-Soul contact would be perpetual; Mind therefore must be atomic, and hence eternal; it is extremely mobile. Without the aid of the Mind, no Cognition is possible. Mind-Soul contacts are 
the result of Merit and Demerit attaching to the Soul. (Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 52, et seq.) 
(B) ACCORDING TO KUMARILA. 
(Shloka- 
The Sense-organ is the Instrument of Cognition. vārtika, Perception 121). The organ of Perception cannot be one only (Ibid., 159 et seq.) 
There are only five Sense-organs, not endless (Ibid., 169). 
As regards Sense-organs, the Nyayaratnākara has the follow- ing remarks on Shlo. Va. Perception 51:- 
40 
CHAPTER IV: BODY, SENSE-ORGANS AND MIND 
41 
C 
"The Sense-organs are all material and operative by contact. For instance, (a) The Visual Organ, which brings about the per- ception of colour, is of the Essence of Fire, like Light; hence the phenomena of its rendering visible larger and larger things becomes easily explicable, on the analogy of Lamp-light; the reasoning being-the Visual Organ is Firy in its Essence, because it renders perceptible colour, which is the specific quality of Fire.' (b) Similarly, the Olfactory Organ renders odour perceptible, and hence is of the Essence of Earth because odour is the specific quality of Earth; this organ operates through contact; as what happens is that the fine particles of the pollen of flowers become wafted by air and reach the inner surface of the nostrils and there the odour subsisting in those particles becomes apprehended and perceived. (c) Similarly, the Gestatory Organ apprehends Taste and is of the Essence of Water; that this is so is indicated by the fact that Taste is felt when the tongue is wet. not dry; (d) when after bath a man emerges from water, he feels cold when his wet skin comes into contact with Air; so that it is the Air-Element in the body which renders touch perceptible, which shows that the Tacticle Organ is of the Essence of Air; (e) the Auditory Organ is of the Essence of Dik, Space." 
We learn the following from Shästradīpikā (Sū. 1.1.4, page 21) regarding Kumārila's view of Mind:- 
The opponent has raised the question Sense-perception cannot be regarded as Cognition brought about by the contact of the Object and the Sense-organ, because Pleasure, Pain, etc., are Sense-perception and yet, there is no sense-contact in this case." The answer is that there is Sense-contact in this case also, riz., the contact of the Mind, which is a Sense-organ.' Evi- dence of the existence of the Mind is afforded by our own experiencing of Pleasure and Pain. The Cognition of Pleasure is of the Nature of immediate, Direct, Perception; and this leads to the inference of Mind as the instrument of that Direct-Percep- tion; because the Visual and other organs are unable to account for such perception. Some people have regarded Mind as an independent substance by itself. But the Mind is never operative apart from the Body; hence it cannot be regarded as an inde- pendent substance apart from the Body. Question—“ What is the definition of the Sense-organ, which is applicable to the Mind 
F. 6 
42 
PŪRVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
and also to the other well-known Sense-organs? " 
C 
C 
Answer-That 18 called Sense-organ whose contact with the Object brings about the direct clear perception of the object. This Sense-organ is of two kinds-External and Internal. The External is of fire kinds. -Olfactory, Gestatory, Visual, Tactile and Auditory; the Internal is one only, the Mind. The first four respectively have their material source in Earth, Water, Fire and Air. As regards the Auditory Organ, the Taishēṣikas regard it as of the Essence of Akasha. But we take our stand upon the Vedic text Dishah shrotrani,' which speaks of the Auditory Organ as Dik,' Space: and hence regard the Auditory Organ as that part of Space which is enclosed in the tympanum. Lastly, as regards the Mind, it may either be of the Essence of any one of the five, Earth and the rest, or of something apart from these. But this Mind, by itself alone, is operative only on the Soul and its qualities, not upon any thing wholly External; that is why it has been called an Internal organ. In regard to external things, Mind is operative only through one or the other of the five External Organs. In regard to Inferential Cognition also, the Mind operates through the knowledge of the Probans and the Inferential Indicative; and in regard to Remembrance, it operates through Impressions left by previous Cognitions. But it operates inde- pendently by itself only in regard to the Soul and its qualities of Pleasure, Pain, Cognition and so forth (Shastradipikā, pp. 21-22). 
- 
CHAPTER V 
GOD 
(A) ACCORDING TO SHABARA. 
• 
Shabara-Bhāṣya (Trs., p. 22), discussing the question of the relationship between the Word and its meaning, has the follow- ing remarks:- There can be no Creator of this relation, because no Soul is cognised as such by any of the means of cognition. If there had been such a Creator, he could not have been forgotten; just as in the case of Himalaya mountains and such things, it would be impossible to forget the Creator if there had been one. In fact, persons making use of the Veda would certainly have some idea of the Creator of the relation between the words and their meanings Even if the possibility of the said Creator being forgotten were there, we could not admit of the Creator unless there were proofs for it... Presumption (Arthāpatti) cannot lead us to cognise a Creator; if it were a fact that in the absence of a Creator of word-relations, the meaning of words could never be coprehended, then alone could We be justified in deducing the Creator from Presumption. In reality, however, Words are taught as accomplished entities, having the inherent power of expressing their meaning. What actually happens is that, when older people are making use of words for their own purposes, the younger men who happen to hear these words are found to comprehend them; these older people also, when they were young, comprehended the meanings of words as used by the older people of the time; and so on the process of comprehension has gone on, without any beginning in time. . So long as this explanation of the comprehension of word-meanings is available, it cannot be right to presume a Creator. From all this it fol- lows that there has been no Creator of word-relations.' 
• 
Under Sutra 1.1.27 et seq. it has been established that there 
is no Composer of the Veda. 
Sūtra 1.1.5 declares that "the relation between the Word and its Meaning is innate "--which also denies the said Creator. 
43 
44 
C 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
(B) ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA. 
The Creator' of Word-relations has been denied, in the manner of Shabara, in Bṛihati (pp. 174 et seq. also Prakaraṇa- pañchikā, p. 52). 
& 
Prakaraṇa-pañchika (p. 133 et seq.) supplies the following ex- planation: The Mimumsaka lays great stress upon the denotative- ness of Words being independent of personal agency, and inhering in the Words themselves, because, if it were not so, the validity of words and Verbal cognition would be based entirely upon the trustworthy character of the person pronouncing the words; and as the Mimamsaka denies any personal agency in the composing of the Veda, it would mean that no validity can be attached to the Veda itself.--Nor can the Mimāmsaku accept the Naiyāyiku's point of view, by which the denotativeness of words is created and fixed by Conventions among people who introduce and make use of words for the first time-i.e., by God Himself in the first instance. This Nyaya view necessitates the postulating of a 'God,' Creator,' as the originator of words and verbal usages and hence also of the Veda. This militates against the Mīmām- suka's doctrine of the self-sufficiency of the Veda, which must be independent of all personal agency. In fact, if the denotative- ness of words depended entirely upon Conventions made by personal agencies, the Veda would be reduced to the position of a meaningless jumble of words; however, according to the Mimāṁ- saka the pre-eminent function of the Veda lies in the enjoining of certain acts accomplishing an Apurva-invisible subtle potency-- leading up to certain results; and as this Apurva is something beyond the ken of any person, independently of the Veda, how could the denotativeness of those words of the Veda be fixed by any conventious made by any person? As no connection would be possible in regard to those words, all the Vedic texts containing those words would be meaningless. If a Creator-God were admitted, then as this God, being omniscient, would be possessed of the knowledge of all things, including the Apurva, He would be in a position to lay down the necessary conventions. But for reasons stated above,-specially in view of the self-sufficiency of the Veda-the Mimamsaka does not admit of such a God. Hence for the sake of the Veda-his all in all-he finds it necessary to stick to the view that all words and their denotations are begin- 
CHAPTER V: GOD 
45 
ningless and everlasting, independent of all conventions and Agencies. 
The Prabhakara view regarding God is set forth in great detail in Prakaraṇa-pañchikā, p. 137 et seq. It is as follows: 
The Prabhakara denies a Creator for the universe; even though he admits that the universe is made up of component parts, and as such it must have had a beginning and an end in time,-yet he finds no reason for believing that the universe, as a whole, has had a beginning at any one point of time, or that it would all come to an end at any one point of time; hence if the constituent factors of the Universe have a beginning, they must each indivi- dually have their beginnings, one after the other; and they should also cease one after the other; in fact, that is what is actually found to be the case in every-day experience. Thus then, even if it were true that certain factors of the Universe are brought into existence by an Ultra-mundane Supervisor-operating through Dharma-Adharma--this could not be true of the Universe as whole. There are some things-for instance, the bodies of men and animals, which are actually brought into existence by the operation of their parents, and not by any external supervising Agency. Nor is there any force in the Naiyayika's argument that the Dharma-Adharma of man must have a supervisor, pos- sessed of intelligence and faculties higher than those of ordinary 
a 
(Because the Dharma-Adharma of the Body,-which itself is the product of Dharma-Adharma-must always belong to the same intelligent being to whom the body itself belongs; any other being, howsoever intelligent, can never have any knowledge of the Dharma-Adharma of another being; hence the ultra-mundane God could have no knowledge of the Dharma-Adharma of the being that is born as man or animal, etc.; and without such knowledge, He could not exercise any intelligent and effective control over it. Then again, let us examine the character of the Supervision. that God is said to exercise over Dharma-Adharma.—(a) This 'Supervision' cannot be of the nature of Contact or Conjunction: because Dharma and Adharma are qualities and hence not capable of conjunction, which (according to the Naiyāyika himself) is possible for Substances only;-(b) nor can the Supervision be of the nature of Inherence; as the Dharma-Adharma inhering in other Souls could not inhere in God.' And 
as these two- 
• 
E 
" 
46 
PÜRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
C 
C 
C 
Conjunction and Inherence-are the only possible forms of rela- tionship, no other kind of Supervision is possible. In the case of ordinary Agents,-e.g., the carpenter-the Supervision exercised consists in their contact with the tools and instruments, which again are brought into contact with the wood-pieces upon which the man works. This is not possible in the case of God. Nor is it possible for the operations of God to have any effect upon the Dharma-Adharma of Beings; because Dharma-Adharma are qualities, and hence they could not come into contact with any operation of things.Nor can the action bringing about the creation of the Universe be held to lie in the Atoms which operate under the will of God. Because in all our experience we never come across any such supervision or guidance as would be implied in such a process; all Supervision or guidance' in fact is found to be done by Soul over that Body alone which it ensouls by virtue of the Soul's Dharma-Adharma; and the Atoms cannot be said to be such a body' of God; hence He could not guide the activity of the Atom. Even if we grant such a 
Even if we grant such a body' for God, the activity of such a body could not be due to Ilis mere wish; it must be due to an effort put forth by Him. Nor could these Wishes and Efforts be everlasting; as that would make the activity of the Atoms also everlasting; which would lead to the absurdity of an unceasing Creative Process. The argument as generally put forward by the Naiyayika in proof of the Creator-God is that "The Body of man must have a Supervisor, because it is itself non-intelligent." To this his opponent offers the counter- argument-that God cannot be such a Supervisor, because He cannot have any motive in exercising this supervision. We cannot deny the truth of the proposition that there is intelligent supervision only in cases where some purpose of the supervisor is served by the supervision. Then again, the same argument that would prove the existence of the intelligent Supervisor would also prove that Supervisor to be an embodied or corporeal Being; as the Naiyayika bases his argument upon the analogy of the carpenter supervising and guiding the making of wooden articles,- and as this carpenter, is also a corporeal being,-the analogy, extended further, would prove the supervising God also to be a corporeal Being. But, at the same time, 
time, we know that no corporeal being can exercise any effective and intelligent control over such subtle things as Atoms, Dharma and Adharma. Even 
CHAPTER V: GOD 
47 
if He did exercise such control, He himself, as a Corporeal Being, would have to be the creation of another supervisor or creator, and so on and on ad infinitum. Thus then, the supervision of the work of creation being impossible, it has to be regarded as a never- ending process of things coming into existence and passing out of it, under the influence of the Dharma-Adharma of the Souls ensouling those things; and there is no reason for the assumption of an Ultra-Cosmic · God-Creator.'—(Prakaraṇapañchikā, pp. 137 et. seq.) 
(C) ACCORDING TO KUMARILA 
This is what we learn from the Shlokamārtika (Chapter on Sambandhākṣepaparihāra, 41 et. seq.). 
The question of the Creator, God, is raised in connection with the eternality of Word and its meaning and the relation. between the two. The view has been held that the entire verbal process rests upon the will of God who set up, at the time. of Creation, the convention upon which the entire process is based. 
Kumārila denies the beginning of any such Convention relating to the relation of Word and Meaning. 
44 
4 
We do not admit of any beginning of Creation,' says Kumārila. The idea that God created the world, as also Dharma and Adharma along with their means of accomplishment. also Words, their Meanings and the relations between them, and also the Veda" cannot be proved; it is as impossible to prove as the existence, of the Omniscient Person (God) Himself. This is the reason why this view has not been accepted. If there was any point of time when all this world did not exist-i.e., prior to its creation by God-then what would have been the condition of things at the time? Where and in what form would the Creator Himself exist at the time? Who too was the person who would know the Creator at the time and describe Tim to the people later on? How too could there come about the initial impulse to the activity of the Creator? As God could have no body etc., at the time, how could He have a desire to create things? If He had a, body then, that body could not have been created by Himself. Earth, Water etc. being non-existent at the time, of what would God's body consist? As the world is48 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
C 
• 
C 
found to be full of pain and suffering, it cannot be right to attribute its creation to God; specially because at the beginning of Creation, the Merit or Demerit of men could not exist to which their sufferings could be due.-No Agent can create anything without some material to work upon and implements to work with. Nor can Creation be attributed to God's compassion towards beings; for, at the outset, there would be no beings towards whom the compassion would be directed; secondly, if Creation were due to compassion, the world would be made entirely happy, specially as the Creator being all-powerful, nothing could hamper His compassionate activity. If any such extraneous agency did hamper God's activity, then He could not be omnipotent.-What too could have been His purpose in creating the world? No sane person undertakes any attivity without some purpose. If His activity is purposeless, then how can He be an intelligent person? If the activity of God be attributed to His desire for Sport, Lala,'-then, He cannot be regarded as one who has all his desires fulfilled. If He had to carry out all the operations necessary to create and carry on the world, then He would be too busy to be happy over it, and regard it as Sport' (56).-If the desire to create was prompted by 'compassion,' or Sport,' then why should there be a consequent desire to dissolve the world? Even if such a Creator existed, He could not be known by any means of knowledge; even if He were perceptible in some divine form (as is claimed for certain men) no one could ever perceive Him as actually creating the world. We of the present day can have no knowledge, either of the world at the time of Creation or of the Creator himself. The mere assertion by the Creator himself (as stated in the Upanishads regarding Prajapati's declaration about His desire to multiply and so forth) is not enough to bring conviction to us. If the whole worldly process were dependent upon the whim of the Creator, there would be no reasonable basis for the doctrine of Karma (72).-The wish or whim of God also could not arise. without some cause to arouse it; and the cause that would arouse God's desire might very well be regarded as bringing about the things of the world themselves (73).-If all that the Theist is keen about is the theory that there must be some cause, some agency, that controls the world-process, then we are all agreed that the necessary controlling agency is provided by the Karma' 
• 
C 
CHAPTER V: GOD 
" 
49 
of living beings; and on this point there need be no difference of opinion (75). The argument that "the bodies of men must have been created by God, because they are bodies "-would apply with equal force to the Body of God Himself, which is as much a 'body' as our own (77).-If God's body be held to be inhabited and controlled by God Himself, then the controller himself would be without a body. On the same analogy, if the Potter were regarded as the controller' of the Jar, then the Jar would not be something controlled by the Potter (79).— The idea of a God with a body having been rejected, the control- ling and supervising will have to be regarded as done by a bodiless God; and yet no effort is possible for a bodiless being; how can any supervision be exercised without effort? 
Mere desire or wish cannot be enough. Even if such effort on the part of a bodiless being were possible, how could the unconscious Atoms become active by the mere wish of the intelligent Person? It is only the conscious or intelligent servant who acts in accordance with the wish of the conscious or intelligent master (82).-Then, there is the other theistic view that before the beginning of Creation the Supreme Self alone exists, and this Supreme Self, by His own wish, evolves out of Himself the Earth, Water and other things of the world. But that Supreme Self being all-pure, how could he evolve out of Himself things that are not pure (82) ?—The impurities in the shape of suffering and pain have been regarded as the effect of Dharma-Adharma: and these would not be there in the case of the Supreme Self, who is self-sufficient and pure; so that He would not be the source of any evolution that can proceed only from Ignorance and Illusion (84).-If those impurities' are attributed to some other cause, then the theory of One Cause' becomes abandoned (85).-If the Ignorance or Illusion to which the impurities and imperfections are due are inherent in the Supreme Self, then it must be irrevocable; as it would be entering into the very Essence of the One Cause (86).— So much for the Vedantic conception of the cause of Creation. 
C 
As regards the Sankhya view that Creation is due, not to the action of an intelligent Soul or Personality, but to the action and reaction of the Gunas, it has to be explained how the first and initial activity of the Gunas began. Before the Creation, there could not be any Karma' of past Personalities, to which the activity could be due;-nor could there be any wrong 
F. 7 
C 
50 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
notions-nor Hatred and Love etc.; nor any mental operations. of any kind (87-88).-It has been sought to be explained that the source of all trouble lies in the Karma' that are still there in their latent state.-But, as a matter of fact, no effect is ever found to proceed from causes in the latent stage (89).-If Karma in the latent stage were to be cause of the world and all attendent troubles, then there could be no freedom from those, as, in its latent stage, the Karma would always be there (94).— It may be that the Karma themselves are the product of Ignorance; but even so, they could not be set aside by mere knowledge: as there is nothing to prove that it is so (98).-If, then the view is that "Bondage is due to Karma and Karma is due to Ignorance, and when one has attained the knowledge of difference between Soul and Matter,-then the Cause, in the shape of Ignorance, having ceased, the effect, in the shape of Karma ceases to appear, whence Bondage ceases and Liberation comes about," then, the difficulty is that the cessation of Ignorance might stop the appearance of more Karma and the consequent Bondage; but it cannot stop the reaction and fruition of all past Karma (101).There is no basis for 
for the assumption that there is Creation and Evolution of the World, consisting in the birth and destruction of all things 
" (113). 
The fact of there being no Omniscient Person is proved by the following arguments set forth in Shlokavārtika (under Su. 1. 
1. 2, verses 117 to 151):- 
- 
As a matter of fact no one ever meets with anyone who knows everything, who is omniscient; nor can there be any reliable inference of there having been one in the past; nor is there again any verbal authority for believing in any Omniscient Person. How too could reliance be placed on the verbal assertion of another person? There can be no Eternal Scripture speaking of any omniscient person; in case any passage were found in the eternal scripture, it could only be an Artharvada; for if it did really speak of a real person, it could not be eternal; and it has been proved beyond doubt that the Veda is eternal. So no other means of knowledge can apply to that self-sufficient authority that belongs. to the Veda.-As for the argument set up by the Buddhist (who believes in the omniscience of Buddha) that-" Buddha has declar- ed I am omniscient,' and this assertion must be true, because 
CHAPTER V: GOD 
51 
That 
it has been made by lim, like his assertion regarding the heat of Light,"-this is invalidated by the counter-argument-“ My assertion that Buddha and other persons were not omniscient must be true, because it has been made by me, just like the assertion that Fire is hot and bright." In fact this argument of mine is more reliable than yours, because the fact of the assertion being made by me is directly perceived, while the fact of Buddha having made the assertion regarding his own omniscience can, al best, be proved only by means of inferences.-Nor can the idea of there having been an omniscient Person be based upon an un- broken 'memory' (tradition)--because there is an equally strong tradition to the contrary, that Buddha was a hypocrite,--because the idea of omniscience itself is inherently impossible,—and because the idea has been accepted by very few men. the very idea is absurd is clear from the fact that whether or not a certain person is omniscient-i.c., possesses the right knowledge of all things cannot be ascertained by men who do not themselves know, and hence can verify, His knowledge of all things; so that unless one is himself omniscient, he cannot recognise another person to be omniscient; hence there should be, not one, but many omniscient persons (135).-There is another theory-that "all Persons-i.e., their Souls-are inherently omniscient; and the fact of all men, in actual life, not knowing all things is due to the Soul being fettered and disabled by the limitations of the body and the sense-organs (141). The objection against this theory is that this idea of the omniscience of all persons could be derived only from the words of some persons, and the reliability of these words would be dependent entirely upon the fact of those persons being omniscient. This is also against common experience, by which it is found that men are more untruthful than truthful.- The case of the Vedic tradition is different from the Buddhist tradition, in so far as the former is not based on the omniscience of any single person,-it is inherent in the Veda, the reliability of which is perfect and discernible by men of the present, as it has been in the past (151).--The untruthful character of men does not affect the reliability of the Veda, because it is not the work of a personal author. 
to 
God, as world-creator, is denied by Kumārila; but as whether this denial applies also to the Parama-Atman, the Super- Soul, has been felt to be doubtful. On the authority of 
of a 
52 
C 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
( 
comparatively recent work, the Sarvasiddhäntasangraha, it seems that Kumārila was a believer in a multiplicity of Jiva-Souls and in the identity of these with the Super-Soul; this Super-Soul is one and eternal and is present in all Jiva-Souls. This is the teaching of the Vedanta also; and the Shlokavārtika ends its treaties on Soul' with the declaration that sound knowledge of the Soul is to be obtained from the Vedanta.' From this it would seem that Kumārila was a believer in the Super-Soul, Faramātman, in its impersonal aspect, though opposed to the idea of one Personal-World-Creator. But if he had really be- lieved in the Super-Soul, it seems impossible that he should not have asserted that belief and should have left it to be inferred from his reference to the 'l'edanta,' which too does not necessarily indicate his belief in the Super-Soul. 
C 
It is true that the benedictory opening verse of the Shlokavārtika invokes God,' in the shape of Shiva. But it is open to a different explanation also; as pointed out by the Nyayaratnākara. Nor does it necessarily imply belief in the Super-Soul, one, indivisible, permeating all Souls and all things. 
CHAPTER VI 
REALITY OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
(A) ACCORDING TO SHABARA 
As regards the things of the world, the Mimáṁsaka is a confirm- ed Realist. He believes in the reality of the External World, and every writer on the system, from the earliest times, has tried his best to refute the several forms of Idealism that have held ground in the field of Indian Philosophy, 
Shabara-Bhāṣya (Trans., p. 12)—In attacking the validity of Sense-Cognition, the Idealist says," All Cognition is baseless,- i.e., without a real substratum in the external world, as is clear from the case of Dream-Cognition. In the case of Dreams, we have found that Cognition has no real objective substratum.- Waking Cognition is also a Cognition;-hence Waking Cognition also can have no real objective substratum.-It is true that the Cognition that one has in the waking stage is perfectly definite and determinate. But the same may be said of Dream-Cognition also, which is quite definite and determinate till the time of waking. It may be argued that the Dream-Cognition becomes sublated, rejected as false, as soon as the man wakes up.-But from the fact of both being of the nature of Cognition, it can be presumed that the Waking Cognition also will, in due course of time, become sublated and rejected." 
--- 
Such a presumption, however, would be justifiable only if the falsity of Dream-Cognition were due to its being a Cognition. But, if the falsity of Dream-Cognition were due to the fact that it cognises, apprehends, things, then, inasmuch as Waking Cognition also apprehends things and is a Cognition in that sense, this also would be equally false. As a matter of fact, however, the falsity of Dream-Cognition is inferred from other reasons; for instance, that it becomes sublated, on waking, by a Cognition to the contrary. As a matter of fact, Dream appears only while one is sleepy-only half asleep, when the mind is not quite alert, just before and after deep sleep-during which no dreams appear,-while the man is drowsy and his mind is not really perceptive. It is this sleepiness that is the cause of the falsity of Dream-Cognition, and as there is no sleepiness when the man wakes up and the Mind is quite alert, there is no reason why 
53 
54 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
the Cognition during this state should be false. It is possible that during the waking state also there may be some defect in the cognitive process and organs; but whenever there is such a defect, it becomes detected sooner or later and the Cognition is declared to be false.-(Shabara-Bhasya. Trs., p. 12.) 
"But "says the opponent-" as a matter of fact, Cogni- tion is an empty void, i.e., devoid of any foundation in the external world; because we do not perceive any difference in form between the Cognition and its object; what is apprehended by the senses is only the Cognition; from which we conclude that there is no form or shape of any object apart from that Cognition itself." 
Shabara's answer to this is as follows:-This would be so if the Cognition had the form of the Object; as a matter of fact, however, Cognition has no form; it is only the external object. that has form, and is actually apprehended as existing in external space. Then again, the objective of the Sense-Cognition is the Object, not another Cognition; and thus for the simple reason that Cognition, having only a momentary existence, (especially accord- ing to the Buddhist Idealist), could never continue to exist till the appearance of the other Cognition of which it could form the objective. Further, it is only after the Object becomes cognised that the person comes to cognise the Cognition, which he does through a subsequent Inference; the existence of the Cognition being only inferred from the fact of the Object having been cognised. Thus there can be no simultaneity between the Cogni- tion of the Object and the Cognition of that Cognition. It may be true that it is the Cognition of the object that appears first, but it is not the first to become cognised; it sometimes happens that even a cognised object is spoken of as not-cognised; when, for instance, one is speaking of the past, he says, I never knew this thing;' though in reality he really knew it. Further, the form of the Cognition is never apprehended except in terms of the Object; which could not be the case if they were cognised simul- taneously. Hence the Cognition can never be regarded as the objective of Sense-perception. 
Even if the Cognition and the Object were identical in form, it is the Cognition that should have to be denied separate existence, not the Object, which is actually perceived. In reality, however, the two are not identical in form; when we cognise a Cognition,- 
CHAPTER VI: REALITY OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
55 
and this is always through Inference from the fact of the Object being cognised,-we infer it without a form, simply as Cogni- tion,' not as the cognition of a particular object. 
As a matter of fact, whenever the perception of cloth appears, it does so only when the yarns composing the cloth are there, which establishes a permanent connection between the Cognition and the Object cognised, in the shape of the cloth, whose existence there- fore cannot be denied. If there were no such connection between the Cognition and the Object cognised, it might be possible to have the cognition of the colth, when the object before the eye is the jar. 
All this goes to prove that the Cognition has a real substratum in the extenal world.-(Shabara-Bhāṣya. Trs.. pp. 12-15.) 
In the above account, Shabara has disposed of Idealism in both its forms-in the common form where the reality of the External Object alone is denied, while that of the Idea or Cogni- tion is admitted,-as mamentary, by the Buddhist, and as perma- nent by the Vedantin,-and also in the extreme form of the Buddhist Nihilism, Shunyarada, according to which all is Shunya,' mere 'Void.'-This latter extreme view, however, has been confuted by implication only; the direct confutation has been directed entirely to the proving of the reailty of the external object: the idea being that when the reality of the Object has been established, that of the Idea or Cognition cannot be denied. 
f 
C 
C 
According to the interpretation of the Bṛhati, there is no reference to the extreme Nihilism, in the Bhasya, when it speaks of Shunya,' Void;' all that it means is that the Cognition is 'VOID'.., devoid of all external background.-This same inter- pretation of the Bhasya has the support of Kumarila also, according to whom the question considered by the Bhasya with the words Shinyastu, etc.' is-Is it a fact that Cognition is able to function only when Objects like the Pillar have a real existence in the external world?-or is it that Cognition rests in itself, and not in any object extraneous to itself? 
(B) PRABHAKARA'S VIEW OF THE REALITY OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
The Idealist having put forward the view that "there is no real Object in the external world; whenever we have the cognition 
56 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
of things, like the wall, for instance, it is baseless, being due entirely to the Vasana, Predisposition, present in the mind of the congiser," the answer 
answer of Prabhakara is as follows:- (Bṛhati, p. 69 et. seq.)-Whenever we have to find out the cause of a certain effect, we always assume a cause which accounts for the appearance of the effect,-and not one which would be de- structive of the effect. In the case of Dreams and other Cognitions, the Cognition that appears clearly manifests external things: this effect in the form of such a Cognition cannot be explained except on the basis of the real existence of the external things; and when one thing is not possible without another, the latter is regarded as its cause. Hence the only right view is that it is the external thing which is the cause, the basis, of the said Cognition. In fact, no Cognition is ever apprehended as being without an external basis. For these reasons, the Perception brought about by the senses cannot be due merely to the Predisposition present in the mind of the observer. Some dreams may certainly be accounted for on the basis of this Predisposition due to the thoughts and anxieties in the mind of the man when going to sleep, but it is not so in all cases. In ony case it is not so in the case of our Iaking Cognition, which is perfectly well-defined. 
In cases of 'rong Cognition of things, what happens is that there is no Cognition of the things at all, not that the thing cognised has no existence in the external world. 
Says the Idealist," Cognition is the property of the Soul, or of the Mind, or of Consciousness itself.-What is meant is that Samvit (Objective Ideation, or Perception) is actually perceived; if it were not perceived then there could be no perception of things at all; and yet what is formless cannot be perceived. There is only one form, in the shape of what is perceived;-e.g., a parti- cular odour; this is the form therefore which must belong to the Percepeion; this Samvit (Perception) is not in the form of the Soul, or of the Mind; as these two exist even without the Cogni- tion; hence Perception (Samvit) cannot be identified with the Soul or with the Mind. It is only right to identify it with Conscious- ness (Jñāna); so that what is perceived is only the Samvit, Objective Ideation, not any external object in the shape of Sound and the rest." 
What is meant by the Idealist (says the Ṛjuvimală, p. 78) is as follows: What is perceived is the Samvit (Objective Idea- 
CHAPTER VI: REALITY OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
57 
tion); if there were two distinct factors in the Perception-in: the shape of Cognition (Iñāna) and Object, then there would be three forms in the Perception-(1. of the Perception, Samrit itself, 2. of Consciousness and 3. of the Object). While what is actual- ly manifested is only one form, the Blue, for instance If this Blue colour belonged to the Object or to Consciousness, then the Perception (Samvit, the Objective Ideation) itself would be formless, and hence imperceptible; and if the Perception is imperceptible, the Object and Consciousness also would be imperceptible. Hence, Cognition must be regarded as devoid of any correspond- ing real external object." 
Prabhākara's Siddhanta 
on this matter is as follows:- (Brhati-Ṛjuvimālā, pp. 80 et. seq.) The Samrit (Percep- tion, Objective Ideation) and the Object-both are perceived; not 80 Consciousness (Iñāna);—though the form perceived is one only, yet the Perception (Sameit) is not the only entity involved, because both-Perception as well as the Object-are both equally manifested in every act of Perception. Though the Samvit (Perception) by itself is formless, yet it is perceptible, because the form in which it appears is only that of the resultant of the act of Perception; and this Resultant does not stand in need of another form. The Jñana has to be admitted as the direct cause of the said Samrit, which could not come about without cause. The question arising as to what is Jñana (Cogni- tion) the answer is that it is the cause leading to the effect in the form of the said Objective-Ideation or Perception. This effect, in the form of Objective-Ideation, must have a cause; the permanent Soul cannot be that cause; for were it so, then the Ideation also would have to be eternal; but the Cognition that is inferred is a fleeting one; and when this Cognition is inferred as the cause of Perception or Objective Ideation, it is so only in the form of Blue and such external things. Thus all Cognitions must be based upon real objects. 
The next question is-" If the Blue Object is what is per- ceived, how about the Perception itself? Is it perceived or not? If it is not perceived, its existence should not be admitted.”—The answer to this is as follows:-(Br., pp. 82 et. seq.) The Percep- tion (or Objective Ideation) is certainly perceived, but it is per- ceived as Perception, not as a perceptible object; i.e., the Percep- 
F. 858 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
tion is perceived by itself, not as the object of another Perception; even without being an object, it manifests itself; it is not neces- sary that everything that is perceived should be percieved as an object. When therefore the term perceptible' is applied to Perception, it is only in the sense of its being perceived directly, by itself, not in the sense of its forming the object of sensuous cognition. The said Perception cannot be regared as unperceived, because it is on the basis of Perception itself being perceptible that things perceived are regarded as such. 
regarded as such. This Perception (Samvit) however leads on to Cognition (Iñāna), which is puely inferred as the cause of the said Perception or Objective Ideation. The inference is this:-This Objective Ideation (Perception) is an effect; it must therefore have a cause; this cause is the Jñana (Cognition). As a matter of fact, all men are cognisant of this two-fold form-one the effect in the form of the Samvit, Percep- tion, the Objective Ideation, and the other the causs, in the form of the Jñana, Cognition. Thus then apart from the Objective Ideation or Perception, there is the Cognition and also the Object.- (Br., p. 83.) 
---- 
< 
• 
Prabhakara (Br., p. 84) has also drawn a distinction between the terms' Samvědya' (Perceptible) and Pramēya' (Cognisable). It is Perception where the form of the object is clearly manifested as a factor; while in Pramiti or Cognition there is no Objective Ideation, hence no other form; consequently Cognition cannot be regarded as perceptible; also because Cognition is fleeting, momen- tary; hence at the time that the Cognition of that Cognition appears it will have ceased 
ceased to 
to exist: hence it could not be perceived. Hence it follows that- Until the Object has been cognised, no one apprehends the Cognition; it is only after the Object has been cognised that the Cognition comes to be inferred' (Shabara). 
- 
From all this we conclude that the entire cognitive pheno- menon is not based wholly upon Vāsanās, Predispositions, it is, based upon real objects in the external world. 
(C) REALITY OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD ACCORDING TO KUMARILA 
The Mimamsaka lays stress upon the reality of the external world, because, if Cognition had no real basis in the external world. all that has been declared in the Veda in regard to the 
CHAPTER VI: REALITY OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
59 
worldly and supernatural results following from actions would be meaningless. (Shlo. Va.-Nirālambanavāda, 3).—The needs of the situation cannot be met by postulating the Illusory Reality' of things; because what is real cannot be illusory, and what is illusory cannot be real (6).-Whatever is is real, whatever is not is unreal; and there can be no two kinds of reality-true real- ity and untrue (illusory) reality (10).-The opposite view is re- presented by (1) the Yogachāru-Buddhist Idealist-who postu- lates the Cognition, Idea, Vijñāna, but without a real substratum in the external world; and (2) by the Madhyamika—Buddhist,- the Nihilist-who does not admit even the Idea. Both are agreed as to the unreality of the external world (14-15). 
This is the reason why the Mimāmsaka makes it his business to demolish the arguments set forth by the Idealists and Nihilists and seeks to establish, by his own arguments, the reality of the external world. Kumārila has done this in geat detail in the two chapters of his Shlokavārtika where he shows that the reasonings set forth by the other party are entirely fallacious, even on technical logical grounds.-The main positive argument that Kumārila has put forward in support of the Reality of things is this "The idea that Cognitions have a real basis in the external world must be true, because it is an idea that is never sublated,— just as the idea of Dreams being false is never sublated" (79).—He goes a step further, and declares (107-108) that even Dream- Cognition is not entirely devoid of an external basis; even there we have the cognition of external things; with this difference that the things cognised are cognised as things related to place and time other than the real ones. Similarly in all cases of Wrong Cognition, there is always some sort of external basis.-Nor can we admit of the Idealist's explanation that all cognitions are the products of Vasana, Predisposition-and hence they need not presuppose an external hasis. Because mere verbal jugglery-the using of the word 'Vāsanācannot explain away the real state of things.—(Nirālambanavāda, 107 et. seq.) 
It is a universally recognised fact that what is apprehended by a cognition is something which is endowed with a definite colour, size and shape.-The question that has to be considered is To what does all this colour, etc., belong? To the Cognition itself? or to something exterior to it? (Shunyavāda, 8-9.) 
60 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
The Idealist view is that the colour, etc., that are apprehend- ed belong to the Cognition or the Idea itself, so that there is no need for postulating an external object,-especially because all parties are agreed that the colour, etc., are manifested in the Cognition (19);-there is no proof of the fact that the Cognition has any connection with an external object (49).That the form belongs to the Cognition is proved by the fact that it is apprehend- ed when the Cognition is there, and not apprehended when the Cognition is not there (53). 
Kumarila's answer to this is as follows:-According to the Idealist's view the Cognition itself would be both what apprehends and what is apprehended; which is absurd (64). Cognition can- not be both apprehender and the apprehended; both parties are agreed that it is the apprehender; so that the apprehended must be something other than the Cognition (147-148).-In as much as a Cognition cannot apprehend itself, what is apprehended by it must be something exterior to itself; and on account of the diver- sity of the causes of Cognition,-such causes consisting of the Sense-organs, etc.-it is only one object that is apprehended by one Cognition, not all objects by all Cognitions. Whatever object is presented to us in whatever form by the Cognition as appre- hended by itself is naturally accepted by us to be of that form (225-227). 
The Shastradipikā (p. 37) explains that the Perception of an object ends, not in a further cognition of that Perception, but in the paroksya or Pratyakṣata;-i.e., Direct Apprehendedness- of that object,-and that every act of Perception involves a certain relationship between the perceiver and the perceived, the former being the Agent and the latter the Object. This Agent- Object relationsrip is not possible without some activity on the part of the Agent; hence the presence of this Relationship leads to the Inference of its invariable concomitant,-riz., the action of the Agent; and it is this action, which, in the case of knowledge, is known as Cognition: and it has been shown to be inferable from the relationship between the cognising Soul and the cognised Object. 
CHAPTER VII 
THINGS OF THE WORLD 
We have seen that the things of the World-the Cbjects of Cognition-are real. Now there arises the question-What are these things? Under what general heads are they classified by the Mimāmsaka? So far we have not met with any systematic account of these * Padarthas or categories, in the Bhāṣya, or in the Brhati or in the Shlokavārtika or in the Tantra vārtika. 
(A) SHABARA. 
The only indication that we find in the Bhāṣya is under Sü. 10.3.44, where kinds of things are mentioned as Dravya (Sub- stance), Guna (Quality), Karma (Action) and Aragara (Consti- tuent Part). 
(B) PRABHAKARA, 
As regards the Prabhakara view, we gleam the following from Prakaraṇapañchikā: 
Prefacing the proof of Similarity' as a distinct category (on p. 110) it says that it cannot come under any of the well- known categories-Substance, Quality, Action, Community, In- herence and Ultimate Individuality; which are precisely the six categories of the Vaishëșika. But in regard to the last, Ultimate Individuality, it adds that People learned in this Science do not accept any such category.' From this it is clear that Prabhakara admits the first five categories of the l'aishēşika, and he posits Similarity in place of the Vaishishika's 'Vishēṣa' (Ultimate Individuality).-The same work (on the same page, 110) provides the following account of this Similarity.'-It is something entirely different from Substance and the other categories, as is proved by the fact that it enters into our Consciousness exactly in the same manner as any other category, and our Consciousness is the sole criterion regarding the existence of things. This Similarity' cannot be regarded as a Substance,' because it is found in Quality and Action also, and no Substance is known to subsist in the latter, though we speak of similar colours, similar 61 
L 
C 
C 
62 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
actions, and so forth.-Similarity cannot be classed under Jati, Community; because it does not form the basis of any comprehen- sive conception (says Bṛhati, MS. p. 86).-Inheence is a kind of Relation, hence Similarity cannot be classed under that. As regards the Vaisheşika category of 'Vishesa,' Ultimate Individuality, it is only the quality of Separateness, which separates-differenciates-the ultimate substances in the shape of Atoms. Whatever it is, it is quite contrary to Similarity. For these reasons Similarity must be regarded as a distinct cate- gory; it is apprehended as subsisting in perceptible things, through the apprehension of such qualities, actions and constitu- ents as are common to the things concerned. 
As regards Shakti, Potency, Force, Power, as a distinct category-we learn from the Prakaraṇapañchikā (pp. 81-82) as follows:-Everything in the world is found to be possessed of some sort of Shakti, Potency, Power or Capacity; it cannot be perceived, but it can be inferred; for instance, Fire is always scen to bring about a certain Effect, in the shape of Burning; but the same Fire, when under the influence of certain incantations, fails to bring about that effect; there has been no change in the visible form of the Fire that can account for this phenomenon, the visible form of the Fire remaining exactly the same in both cases. This leads us to the conclusion that there is something in the Fire by virtue of which it can Burn, and in the absence whereof it cannot burn. From this we are led on to conclude that in all things there is something which enables them to produce their Effects, being deprived of which they are unable to do so. To this imperceptible something, we give the name Shakti, Potency Power, or Capacity.-In eternal things this Potency is eternal, but in transitory things it is brought into existence along with the things themselves. This Shakti cannot be the same as Samshāra, Embellishment; as this latter is ephemeral in Eternal things also. 
Karman, Action, also is one of the perceptible categories. When a thing moves, what we actually see is, not the moving of the thing, but only the various conjunctions and disjunctions that the thing passes through with certain points in space; the expression the thing moves' also refers to these same conjunc- tions and disjunctions; and yet these conjunctions and disjunctions. 
CHAPTER VII: THINGS OF THE WORLD 
63 
cannot be regarded as the 'Action' of moving, because the Action subsists entirely in the active thing, while the conjunctions and dis- junctions subsist in outside points of space; and as it is only these conjunctions and disjunctions that are seen, Action cannot be held to be perceptible; it can only be inferred (from the said conjunctions and disjunctions). (Prakarayapañchikā, pp. 78-79.) This is not admitted by the followers of Kumārila (see Shastra- dīpikā, p. 50). 
C 
as a 
Samarāya, Inherence, says the Prakaraṇapañchikā, (pp. 26- 27) cannot be regarded as everlasting; because it is actually found to be ephemeral; for instance, the Inherence between the Com- munity and the Individual comes into existence when that Indivi- dual is produced, and perishes as soon as that Individual perishes. 
As regards Substance, we find four-Earth, Water, Air and Fire-mentioned in the Prakaraṇapanchikā (p. 24), where also we find the term Gaganādayaḥ'; so Gagana, Akasha, would be the fifth; (6) Atman, Soul, is admitted to be a Substance under the chapter called Tattraloka, where also (7) Manas, Miud, is men- tioned as a Substance whose contact with the Soul brings about Cognition, Pleasure and Pain etc. Again on p. 84, we find the Eternal Substances enumerated, wherein, apart from Atoms, Akasha and Atman (Soul), we also find Time (8) and Space (9). As regards Tamas, Darkness, which some peojle regard Substance by itself, the Prakaranapañchikā (pp. 142–145) says it is only absence of Light. Of the Substances, Earth, Water, Air and Fire are perceptible by the visual as also by the Tactile Organ; Akāsha and the rest cannot be regarded as perceptible, because they cannot be seen or touched or heard. (Prakaraṇa- pañchikā, p. 24.) Ikāsha cannot be seen by the eye, because it is devoid of colour; if it had colour, it would also be tangible; as Colour and Tangibility go together, the whiteness that appears in Akasha belongs to the patches of Fire hanging in the atmosphere; and the Darkness noticed at night is not the quality of anything, it is only absence of Light: if it were something positive, it would be visible during the day also. (Prakaraṇapañchikā, pp. 143- 144.) In this connection it may be noted that as Akasha is im- perceptible, it cannot form one of the constituents of the Body. Though Akasha cannot be perceived, it can be inferred as the Substratum of Sound; Sound cannot belong to the source from 
64 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
which it proceeds, because the organ of Hearing can apprehend only what it can get at, reach, and it can never get at the source of. Sound. (Prakaraṇanañchikā, p. 145.) 
The touch of Air is neither hot nor cold; its apparent coolness is due to the water-particles hanging in the Air, and the leat to the fire-particles floating in it. (Ibid., pp. 77-78:) 
Among Qualities, Colour, Taste, Odour, Touch, Number, Dimension, Separateness, Conjunction, Disjunction, Priority Posteriority, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion and Effort are perceptible.--Conjunction is of three kinds-(1) Due to both members, (2) Due to the action of either of them and (3) Due to another Conjunction. (Pra. Pañ., pp. 26 and 151.) 
Composite Wholes or Aggregates are of four kinds-Earth, Water, Fire and Air; the first three are of large dimensions, and having colour, are perceptible by the senses, by the organ of Touch and by the organ of Vision. Air being devoid of colour, is perceptible by the organ of Touch alone.-The Atoms of these substances are, by their very nature, imperceptible; so also is the compound of two atoms; as the large dimension, which is a neces- sary condition in all perceptibility, is present only in such sub- stances as have many, i.e., not less than three constituent particles. -Akasha, Time and Space, even though of large Dimensions, are not perceptible, as they are devoid of Touch and Colour. 
• 
This is all we can glean from Prabhakara Sources, but a comparatively recent work, the Sarvasiddhāntārahasya supplies us with the following information.-According to the Prābhākara, there are the following categories-Substance, Quality, Action, Community, Paratantrata (which appears to be the same as Subsistence or Inherence), Shakti (Potency, Power, Capacity), Similarity and Number. Action is inferred from the disjunction of a thing from one point in Space and its conjunction with an- other. Inherence is not Eternal, because it subsists in perish- able things also, and being a relation thereof, it could not be eternal. Nor can it be one; it is as many as there are things in the world. Potency, Power or Capacity is the common name given to that by virtue of which, Substances, Qualities and Actions and Communities come to be regarded as the Cause' of things; it is to be inferred from particular Effects; it is Eternal in Eternal things, and perishable in perishable things. Similarity, 
C 
CHAPTER VII: THINGS OF THE WORLD 
C 
65 
like Potency, cannot come under any other category, and hence has to be regarded as a distinct category. The Vishesa,' Ultimate Individuality, of the Vaishesika cannot be a category: because the differentiation among Eternal things-like Akasha, Atoms, etc.,- for the purpose whereof the Visheșa has been posited-can always be done on the basis of the ordinary qualities of the things con- cerned. 
Apart from other things the mention in this work of 'Number' as a distinct category by itself appears to be clearly wrong; as the Prakaraṇapañchika (on p. 54) speaks of Number as a 'Quality'. 
In reference to Darkness as a Substance, and its perceptibility, there is an interesting verse current among Pandits:- 
64 
ant zou Acura azafęfa mà ayfèà यदीदं रूपि स्यात किमिह न भवेत् स्पर्शनगुणः । gāts and fafumfagdfasdafaar 
तमोवृन्दं धत्ते कचभरमिषेणेन्दुवदना ॥ 
The Upholder 
of Darkness as an independent Substance. argues Darkness is a Substance, because it is black, like the Jar,' whereupon the other party puts forward the confutation- If it had colour, it should be amenable to Touch also.'-In order to weaken the force of this confutation, says the poet, the fair-faced girl bears the mass of black hair, in order to show that Darkness is both dark-coloured and tangible." 
(C) THINGS OF THE WORLD ACCORDING TO KUMARILA. 
are 
classed 
The Sarvasiddhantarahasya has the following:- All categories, according to the Bhatta, under two heads-Bhava, Positive, and Abhāva, Negative. The latter is of four kinds-Prior Negation, Utter Destruction, Absolute Negation and Mutual Negation.-Positive cate- categories, there are four, viz., Substance, Quality, Action and Community. Of Substance, there are eleven-Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Akasa, Space, Time. Soul, Mind, Darkness and Sound. Some people mention Gold as the twelfth. Of Qualities, there are thirteen-viz., Colour, Taste, Odour, Touch, Dimension, Separateness, Conjunction, Disjunction, Priority, Posteriority, Gravity, Fluidity and Viscidity.-Of Actions 
F. 9 
66 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
there are five viz., Throwing upwads and the rest.-Commu- 
nities there are two-Higher and Lower. Shakti (Potency) and Sadṛshya (Similarity) are included under 'Substance.' Of Potency, there are two kinds-Sahaja, Inborn,, and Adhyeya Extraneous, Imposed from without. 
All that we can glean from the original Bhaṭṭa sources is as follows: 
'Similarity' cannot be a distinct category by itself; if it were so, we could not account for the varying degrees of Similarity between things and things. Nor is there any reason for regard- ing it as a category; in fact, it consists only in the presence in one thing of the character and conditions present in another thing.' (Shastradīpikā, p. 52.) 
As regards Karman, Action, it is not something to be inferred (as held by Prabhākara), it is directly perceived.—It cannot be regarded as only Inferred; because it could be inferred only as the non-constituent cause of the conjunctions and disjunctions of the active object with points in space; and as such, it would have to be cognised as subsisting in that thing as well as in Space. As a matter of fact, however, it is cognised in the thing only. Action must be regarded as perceived; we actually see the thing passing through certain conjunctions and disjunctions with points in Space; but the cognition that we have is that what brings about these conjunctions and disjunctions lies in the thing and not in Space; and that which forms the basis of this cognition is called the Action of the thing. (Shāstradīpikā, p. 50.) 
Samavāya, 'Inherence,' is denied (vide Shlokavārtika 1.1.4, Pratyakṣa, 146--150)-as a relation, between the Com- munity and the Individual, for instance. Because so long as the Individual has not come into existence, there can be no real rela- tion, as there is only one of the two relatives concerned; and after the Individual has come into existence, before the relation has been established, it cannot be regarded as a permanent, insepar- uble, relationship. In fact the relationship cannot be anything distinct from the things themselves among whom it is supposed by the (Vaisheṣika) to subsist. 
CHAPTER VIII 
HEAVEN 
The name 'Heaven' is applied to that happy state which is entirely free from all touch of pain, and which, as such, is desired by all men. (Prakaraṇapañchikā, pp. 102-103.) This is a paraphrase of the well-known definition provided in the Vishnu- Purāṇa- 
यन्न दुःखेन सिम्भिन्नं न च प्रस्तमनन्तरम् । 
अभिलाषोपनीतं च तत् पदं स्वःपदास्पदम् ॥ 
Sukha, Happiness, Pleasure, is not mere absence of pain. In the absence of pain what we feel is only that there is no pain; the feeling being purely negative; so that what we are conscious of in the Soul by itself is as without pain, not as with some positive quality. On the other hand, when we feel happy or pleased, we are conscious of something positive,-a positive quality, as belonging to the Soul; or more exactly, the Soul as endowed with a positive quality.-(Prakaranapañchikā, p. 149.) 
67CHAPTER IX 
JATI 
(A) JĀTI, SĀMĀNYA, CLASS, GENUS, COMMUNITY, 
( 
Preliminary Note. 
C 
UNIVERSAL' 
The Nyāya-Sutra and its commentaries have drawn a distinc- tion between the terms Jūti and Akrṛti,' the former is used in the usual sense of the Universal,' but the latter is used in the sense of Configuration'; and according to them the denotation. of the Word consists collectively in Vyakti (Individual),. Akṛti (Configuration or Figure) and Jati (Universal). (Nyāya-Sútra, 2.2.68.) In later Nyaya-literature, however, the distinction appears to have been dropped, and in discussions relating to the denotation of Words, we meet with the two words, Vyakti' (Individual) and Jāti (Universal) only. 
C 
< 
4 
C 
f 
There has been no such distinction between Jati' and 'Akṛti' in Mimämsä literature; in fact the two have been distinctly identified. For instance, Shabara says (under Sū. 1.3.33) T- कर्मणां सामान्य मात्रमाकृतिः; Kumārila also says (in Shlokavārtika, on Vanavāda 3) that Akṛti is the same as Jati' or Sāmānya '; and he distinctly denies the connotation attributed to the term 'Akṛti' by the Naiyāyika; he says (Tantravārtika, Trs. pp. 330- 331) that the term, Akṛti' does not stand for Configuration or Shape or Figure. 
C 
(B) SHABARA'S VIEW OF THE UNIVERSAL' 
On the question of the denotation of words, the Mimamsaka's view is that the word denotes the Class, Community, Jati, also called Akṛti. (See below under Verbal Cognition.) 
He also holds that the Word, its denotation and the relation between the two,-all this is eternal, having no beginning or end. 
In order to shake this view, his opponent asks-" When you say that it is the Universal, Class or Community that is denoted. by the Word,-is this Universal, an accomplished entity, or some- thing that is to be brought about, produced ?” 
68 
CHAPTER IX: JĀTI, UNIVERSAL 
69 
The answer is that, being actually perceived, it cannot be something yet to be accomplished, as what is perceived is only an accomplished entity. 
This notion of Jati, Universal, cannot be a mere illusion. No conception can be regarded as illusory and false unless we find a more reliable conception to the contrary, which negatives and sets aside the conception in question. 
The opponent argues-"We find such conceptions as Series, Group, Forest-all conceived as single entities,-while in reality there are no such single entities apart from the many component individuals. That is, the Series is nothing apart from the in- dividual factors, the Group is nothing apart from the component members, and the Forest is nothing apart from the trees composing it; the comprehensive conception of the Community or Universal as an entity, must, therefore, be a misconception and a mere illusion." 
The answer to this is that the Forest is actually perceived as a single entity; and the validity of this fact of Sense-perception cannot be denied. If you deny this, you might as well deny the real existence of the trees themselves and reduce yourself to the position of the Buddhist Idealist. . . . Merely because the Forest is not perceived apart from the trees, it does not follow that it does not exist as an entity. (Shabara-Bhāṣya Trs., p. 21 et seq.) 
In all cases-such, for instance, as the Vedic text to the effect that the Altar should be made like the Shyena,' the term 'Shyena' (Kite) must be taken as denoting the Universal or Community. In fact terms like Cow' are always understood in the sense of an Individual belonging to a particular Community; and what is directly denoted by the term is the Community; and this cognition of the Community leads to the cognition of the Individual. In this way, as the term denotes the Community, and through that, the Individual also, there would be no dissociation between the Individual and the acts prescribed by words denota- tive of Communities and Individuals. (Su. 1.3.30-35, Shabara- Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 118-124.) 
C 
(C) JATI, UNIVERSAL ACCORDING TO PRABHĀKARA. 
We have a full account of the Prabhakara's view of Jāti, Community, Universal' in the Bṛhati-Ṛjuvimalā, pp. 163–173; 
C 
70 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
and it has been clearly set forth in the Prakaraṇapañchikā (pp. 
17-32). 
< 
There is a difference of opinion among philosophers regard- ing the exact character of Jati':-(1) according to some the notion of Jati' is purely imaginary, illusory; (2) according to others it is a real entity, but not apart from the individuals wherein it subsists, and as such is cognisable only along with these latter; (3) others again hold that it has a real existence of its own, apart from the individuals comprising it, and its existence can be cognised through Inference; (4) lastly, according to some, it is different as well as non-different from the individuals com- prising it, and is apprehended by Perception. According to Prabhakara the Juti is something real, distinct from the Indivi- duals which are its substrata, receptacle, and is perceptible by the senses. Says the Karikā— 
जातिराश्चयतो भिन्ना प्रत्यक्षज्ञानगोचरा 
When we properly analyse the notion of Jati, we find that the only basis that we have for accepting any such thing lies in our Con- ception of some sort of Non-difference among a number of things which are known to be different individually. 
The Buddhist Idealist, consistently with the doctrine of Universal, Perpetual Flux, denies all aggregates, and hence the Jati also, which is only an aggregate of Individuals. 
The Idealist's conclusion is that," the Jati has 
has no real existence, nor are there any substances which could be the substratum of Jäti." 
For a detailed discussion, from the Buddhist point of view, the reader is referred to Shintarakṣita's Tattvasangraha (Translat- ed in the Gaekwad's Oriental Series, Vol. 80, pp. 402-445). 
Prabhakara's answer to the Idealist position against Jati is as follows: 
The proof of the existence of anything must ultimately rest in our own consciousness, and it cannot be denied that there are present, in our consciousness, distinct cognitions of the gross or aggregated forms of things and what is thus distinctly cognised should not have its existence denied. As regards the constitution of the gross or aggregated substance, it must exist as we actually perceive it; that it is made up of subtle constituent particles is 
CHAPTER IX: JĀTI, UNIVERSAL 
71 
implied by its very nature; in fact, without this, our conception of it would be impossible. Such being the indisputable fact, it becomes necessary to find an explanation for the fact of a number of subtle particles combining to make up a gross and aggregated object. The only explanation possible is that a number of parti- cles, coming into conjunction among themselves, tend to bring into existence a single object, which being perceptible, (while the particles themselves may be imperceptible), is called gross or aggregate; a single conjunction subsisting over all the component particles, and that same Conjunction tending to combine all the said particles into one aggregated whole. Thus in bringing about one aggregated whole, the constituent particles are the material or constituent cause, and their conjunction is the immaterial cause. 
< 
This aggregate subsists in all the component particles collect- ively, and not in each of the particles severally. It is not necessary for all the particles to be perceived before the whole is perceived, because the whole is something different from the parts: and as in every case the cause' that we are justified in assuming is only that which is sufficient to account for a certain given effect, for the perception of the whole, we must regard as its necessary cause, the perception of only those parts without which the perception of the whole would not be possible; as a matter of fact, if only a few of the parts are perceived, it is enough to bring about the perception of the whole. Then, again, the fact of the whole being always found together with the parts is due to one being the cause of the other. That the whole is yet something different from the parts is shown by the fact that the two give rise to entirely different effects in our consciousness; e.g., the whole gives rise to the notion of something that is one and ertensive: while the parts produce the notion of things many in number and small. 
The existence of the aggregated whole having been proved, the existence of the Jati cannot be denied, merely on the ground that there can be no whole made of the parts. 
C 
This Community, Universal,' Jāti, is eternal, and when a new Individual comes into existence, which belongs to that Jati, what is born is not the Jati, but the relation of the existing Jati to that particular individual. This relation, which is Inherence, is not eternal (according to the Mimamsaka). Similarly when 
72 
" 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
certain individual ceases to exist, what ceases is only its relation to the Universal,' which continues to exist in other individuals. The Universal resides in its entirety in every Individual; as is clear from the fact that we recognise the same Universal in every Individual. Nor is the Universal ever perceived apart from the Individuals. It is perceptible by the senses, as is shown by the fact that its cognition is brought about by its coming into contact with the organs of perception, though it is the Individual in which it subsists which is in direct contact with the sense- 
organs. 
While admitting such Jatis, Universals, as 'Substance,' 'Quality' and the like, the Prābhākara does not admit of the summum genus 'Satta,' 'Being,' as including all that exists; and this for the simple reason that we have to accept such a Jati as 'Substance' because we actually perceive a number of individual things as having certain characters in common: and on the basis of this perception we postulate the Jāti, ‘Substance.' We have no such cognition of a number of individual things merely as existing, and in the absence of such a conception, we have no basis for the postulating of such a Jati as 'Being.' The term 'Satta,' 'Being,' in fact denotes only the individual existence of the thing and it does not denote any Jati like Satṭā. All that it means is that the thing has an individual existence of its own (not neces- sarily, forming part of an Aggregated Whole). 
Nor does Prabhakara admit of such Jatis as 'Brahmana', 'Kṣattriya' and the like; as such Jatis cannot be perceived by the senses. All that is meant by calling a man 'Brahmana' is, not that he belongs to a certain Jati, but only that he is descended from a particular line of ancestors. This also is the view of Kumārila— 'ब्राह्मणत्वादि योनितः' (Shlo. Va. Vana-Váda, 29.) This purity of descent is to be accepted until there is sufficient evidence to the contrary. (Vide Tantravārtika under 1.2.2.) 
(D) KUMARILA'S VIEW OF JATI, 
UNIVERSAL' 
As Jaimini in his Sutra 1.3.33 has declared the 'Akṛti' to be what is denoted by the Word, and the Nyāya-Sutra and Bhāṣya have recognised Akṛti as something different from what is com- monly known as Jāti, 'Class,' 'Community,' 'Genus,' 'Universal,'- Kumarila, at the very outset, points out that it is Jati itself which 
CHAPTER IX: JĀTI, UNIVERSAL 
73 
has been called Ahrti; so the Jati is called Akṛti in the sense that it is what serves to define the Individual. Sāmānya also is another name given to Jāti, on the ground that it provides the basis for the common comprehensive notion of all individuals included under the Universal. Thus Jāti,' 'Akṛti' and 'Sāmānya' are all synonyms. (Shlo. Vā. Akṛti 3-4.) In regard to all things, there are two kinds of ideas-inclusive and exclusive. If it were not so, and if things were only erclusive, then they could never be conceived of as inclusive; and vice versa. Thus there is a perma- nent and inseparable relationship between the Individual and the Class or Universal; all individuals being included in the Universal; and the Universal pervading over, embracing, all individuals (9). The Class or Universal is something that is distinct from the Individuals, and yet it embraces the Individuals and subsists in each one of them. It is through this that we come to have a single comprehensive unitary conception of several individuals under one head,-of all individual cows asocw,' for instance. It is to this something that people apply several names, such as 'Sāmānya,' 'Jāti,' 'Akṛti' (17-18). The relationship between the Individuals and the Universal is natural, inherent in themselves- and not adventitious, brought about by any causes (31).-Question "Why should the Universal 'Cow' reside only in the animals with the develop, etc.?" Answer-Because it is the same as- consists of these animals. Question" To what is the identity due?" Answer-To the very nature of the things concerned; i.e., several individuals come into existence only as identical with a particular Class or Community (47-48).-The difference there- fore that is perceived between the Class or Universal and the Individual is due to their very nature (50).-Question "The Universal comprehends many Individuals, while the Individual does not extend beyond itself,-how can then the two be the same?"-(53).Answer-There is no incongruity in this; as there would be an incongruity only if the Universal subsisted in the many only, and the Individuals subsisted in each of themselves, to the exclusion of all else; as a matter of fact, however, Indivi- duals also, in the form of the Universal-subsist in the many, also, and the Universal in the form of the Individual, subsists exclusively in one only; hence there is no incongruity in the notion of the two being not-different (54-55). The Universal and the Individual being identical, what happens in actual experience 
F. 10 
14 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
is that when the Universal character is coguised as non-different from the Individual, the object becomes cognised as an Indivi- dual, the Universal lying latent in it, and helping its existence; and through these, the Universal does not present itself to our consciousness; and conversely, when the Individuals are cognised as non-different from the Universal, what is cognised is the Uni- versal, and the Individuals remain latent; lastly, when the object is cognised in its mixed character,-as an individual belonging to a particular Universal or Community-then all notions of difference and non-difference between the two (Individual and the Universal) disappear (59-62).-Jāti, Universal, is not the same as Sūrūpya, Similarity of Forms among individual things (65). 
The Dewlap, etc., which have been spoken of as the charac- teristics of the Universal Cow,' are only its indicatives, and serve to distinguish that particular Universal from other Uni- versals (Vanavāda 2 et. seq.). The notion of 'Universal' or 'Community' is universally admitted-by all parties (14-15).- When Akṛti is spoken of as 'Jati,' it is not the Configuration or Shape that is meant. Because no such 'configuration is possible in the case of Fire,' 'Air' and such shapeless things (16).-In fact the 'Jati' is quite distinct from the configurative shape (19). This Universal is eternal (23); it is perceptible by the senses (24). There are various indications whereby one Universal is distin- guished from another; these indicatives consisting of specialities of time, place and other things. For instance, Gold is distinguish- ed from Copper and other metals by its colour; Clarified Butter is distinguished from Oil by its taste and also by smell; the Brāhmṇa and other castes are distinguished by parentage (26-29). No exception can be taken to the subsistence of the Universal in each individual comprised within it, as it is a perceptible fact, and yet it is one only (30). The all-pervading character, and the absence of constituent parts are to be accepted, as in the case of Sound (31). The questions also as to whether the Universal sub- sists in its entirety, or only in part, in each Individual, does not arise when the Universal is something indivisible, impartible, whole (33). So we have to accept the fact as we perceive it-that the Universal subsists in the Individuals. And as there is nothing incongruous in this notion, it cannot be sublated or rejected (42). Hence the conclusion put in the form of an Inferential Argument is"The idea of Cow in regard to several cows must be due to 
CHAPTER IX: JĀTI, UNIVERSAL 
75 
a single entity in the shape of the Universal cow.'-Because they are all cognised in the same form as Cow, like any single cow (44). The notion of cow' in regard to several cows is analogous to the notion of forest in regard to several trees (72), but it is not exactly alike (96). 
C 
Though the Universal is one, it is regarded as 
many when viewed in relation to the Individuals, and though the Individuals are many, they are regarded as one, when viewed in relation to the Universal (85-86). 
- 
Akṛti is cognisable by Sense-perception, and what is meant by Akṛti is commonality, community, not the configuration or shape of things. If it meant the latter, it could not belong to such immaterial and incorporeal things as the Soul, Space, Time, Mind, Action, Quality, all which have no shape at all. Then, again, the Akṛti to which Substances, Qualities and Actions belong are overlapping, these classes varying in their extension, e.g., "Thing' is the largest class we can think of to which Substance belongs; and under 'Substance' come Earth, 
Earth, Water, etc. ... This would not be possible if Shape were meant. material shape of things is destructible and varies with each individual. The idea of Akṛti standing for shape or configuration has been held by the followers of Gautama (Nyaya). It is with a view to remove this misconception that Shabara has made it clear that Akṛti stands for the Universal, the Class and the Com- munity or Commonality (Tantravārtika Trs., pp. 330-331). 
Then, again, the 
This 'Universal' is not totally different from the Individuals. And when something is said in regard to something being done to a thing what is meant is the Universal as subsisting in a parti- cular Individual. Though the Class or Universal is affected by the Individual and vice versa, yet that does not make the Uni- versal transitory, it is only the Individual aspect of it that is so. Particular Individuals vanish; but other Individuals remain; hence the Universal never vanishes. And yet there is some difference between the two, as we speak of the Individual as belonging to, comprised in, the Universal (Tantravārtika Trs., pp. 345 347). 
Though the Universal is not perceived as anything totally different from the Individuals, yet, at the time that we perceive certain individual cows, we are cognisant of a certain character 
76 
- 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
· 
that is common to all the cows perceived and it is this common- ality that constitutes their Jāti or Universal '; and the character that is peculiar to such individual constitutes its Individuality, Vyakti. This is where lies the difference between the Universal and the Individual. . . The Universal, however, is not anything totally different from the Individual This Universal may be taken as standing for the Summum Genus, Being, which is a Universal that is common to all Substances, Qualities and Actions; -or it may stand for each of the three Universals (named in the Bhāṣya) Substance, Quality and Action; or it may stand for all Universals in the world-from the Summum Genus of Being down to the smallest Universal conceivable. In contradistinction to this Universal, the Individual is that which has a specific peculiar- ity; it does not consist of the peculiarities themselves; as the Bhāṣya has distinctly spoken of the Individual as the receptacle of, and hence different from, these peculiarities (Tantrava. Trs., pp. 357-359). 
As regards Atoms, the Mimāmsaka is not keen on postulating them. Kumārila has distinctly declared that the Mimamsakas do not necessarily admit of Atoms' – (Shlokavartika-Anumāna, 183-185). On this the Nyayaratnākara remarks as follows: --We can admit of the Atom only if we find it necessary for explaining and justifying the aggregated objects that we see; so that if the postulating of the Atom tends to do away with the Gross or Aggre- gated objects that we perceive, then, we shall unhesitatingly reject it. The fact of the matter is that we accept each thing as we actually perceive it in our experience, in the form of the Universal or the Individual, the gross or the subtle, the large or the small. This position is thus explained by the Nyāyaratnākara: 
--- 
। 
सिद्ध े स्थूले तदनुपपत्त्या परमाणवा ऽपि कल्प्यन्ते । स्थूलस्यहि परिमितत्व मसत्सु परमाणुषु नोपपद्यते । अनन्तावयवत्वेहि मूर्त्तेरवयवैरन्योन्यावकाश- मप्रयच्छद्भिः अनन्ततद्देशव्याप्तेरेकेनैव सर्षपेण सर्वं जगत पूर्येत । अतो- ऽन्ततोऽपिगत्वा केचिनिरवयवा एवाङ्गीमर्तव्याः इति स्थूलसिद्धौ तदनुपपत्या सिध्यन्त्येव परमाणवः ॥ तम्माद् यदेव किश्चिदवयवि द्रव्यं गोत्वादि सामान्यं वा साक्षात् प्रतीत्या गम्यते तत्सर्वं परमार्थत एव तथाभूतं प्रत्यक्षं चेत्यभ्यु- पगन्तव्यम् ॥ (न्या० २०) 
CHAPTER X 
PRAMANA 
(A) PRAMĀŅA: (1) VALID COGNITION AND (2) THE MEANS OF VALID COGNITION. 
We have cleared the ground by setting forth the Mimāmsuka': view relating to things, the proper understanding of which is incidental to the study of the main subject of Pürva-Mīmāṁsā, which has been declared to be the Knowledge of Duty, Dharma 
Jaimini-Sutra 1.1.1.). 
to 
The understanding of the true nature of Dharma or Duty thus being the avowed aim of the Mimamsaka, he takes care examine in detail the exact nature of the Means of Cognition or Knowledge, as a necessary preliminary to determining the right means of securing the knowledge of the true nature of Duty. 
The first point to be considered is the nature of Cognition itself. 
(B) PRABHAKARA'S VIEW REGARDING COGNITION 
AND ITS VALIDITY. 
Cognition is divided into two broad classes, of Valid and Invalid Cognition-Under Valid Cognition are included all those cognitions that bear directly upon their object; and under Invalid Cognition, those that bear upon their object only indirectly. At the outset this classification corresponds to the two broad divi- sions of (1) Anubhūti, Apprehension, and (2) Smrti, Remembrance. Prabhakara thus regards all Remembrances as invalid (agreeing in this with the Naiyayika) and all Apprehension as valid (differ- ing in this from the Naiyayika). 
The Prabhakara has provided a full account of his views regarding the whole cognitive process-(vide Prakaraṇa-Pañchikā, p. 42 et seq.). 
The starting point of the enquiry is-What is Pramana? In philosophical literature, this term 'Pramāņa' has been used somewhat promiscuously: sometimes in the sense of the Means of Cognition, the etymology of the word being explained as, 
7778 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
pramiyatë jñāyatē anēna,'-while sometimes it is used in the sense of Valid Cognition itself-with the etymology prumiyati yat.' In the present context, the term is used in the latter sense of Valid Cognition. 
What then is this Valid Cognition? The answer is, Valid Cognition is Apprehension and it is something different from Remembrance; which latter cannot be valid, inasmuch as it stands in need of a previous cognition. This Siddhanta has been summed up thus- 
galmazzfa: 81 Exaceut-a 81 exfa: 1 
a gero eyfa: gaqfaqfqsaìquiali (Pru.-Pañchikā, p. 42.) 
प्रमाणं 
6 
This exclusion of Remembrance and its definition does not exclude Recognition entirely; as this latter does not consist entire- ly of Remembrance, there being an element of direct Cognition in it; and to that extent it is valid. Recognition appears in the form This is the same as that,' where the factor represented by this is directly perceived and hence to that extent it bears upon its object directly: while Remembrance bears upon its object wholly indirectly, through the agency of impressions left by previous cognitions. 
C 
C 
Even though Valid Cognition has been defined as Apprehen sion, any wrong cognition cannot be regarded as valid,-not indeed because there is anything invalid in it per se,-it would not be a cognition if it were so,--but because the judgment or idea resulting from that cognition,-e.g., the cognition of Silver' in the Shell, this is silver,'-represents not one but two cognitions one pertaining to 'silver' and the other to 'this'; and of these two, the idea of silver is pure Remembrance, as there is no silver before the eye which could be reached by the sense-organ; and as such not being Apprehension, it cannot be valid; the other factor in the judgment-the factor of 'this'-is of the nature of pure Apprehension and as such must be regarded as valid. Thus we find that the wrongness of the judgment this is silver' lies in the idea of silver which is Remembrance,-and this also is regard- ed as wrong simply because it is not found, later on, to agree with the real state of things, when the Agent proceeds to act up to the judgment and picks up the thing perceived. Even those who regard the entire judgment this is silver' as wrong, base this wrong- 
CHAPTER X PRAMĀŅA 
79 
ness upon the fact that it is subsequently sublated, set aside, denied, and not because there is anything inherently wrong in the nature of the Cognition itself. But in reality, even those people cannot deny the validity of the cognition in so far as the element of This is concerned; as this is not found to be sub- lated, as it is present in the subsequent sublating judgment also which appears in the form- this is not silver, this is shell.' Other instances of wrong cognition are similarly explained. (See below.) 
C 
Prabhākara says (Bṛhati, p. 24)- It is strange indeed how a Cognition can apprehend an object and yet be invalid.' This idea has the support of Kumārila also, who has described the validity of the cognition as consisting in its being an apprehen- 
2 
" 
sion (Shlo. Fā. Sū. 2.53). 
C 
9 
According to Prabhakara it is not a necessary condition of Validity of Cognition that its object should be one that is not already known, 
< 
The above definition of Pramaņa, Valid Cognition', pre- supposes the self-validity of Cognition, which must be inherently valid by itself. Valid Cognition can be defined as Apprehension only if each and every Apprehension were inherently right and valid. This 'self-validity' of Cognition forms the very key-stone of Mīmāmsā. The reasons why the Mimaisaka lays stress upon this doctrine lies in the fact that if this were not so, then Cogni- tions derived from the Veda would not be valid or reliable, as the reliability of all Verbal Cognition is dependent upon the veracity of the person using the word and the Mimāṁsaka does not admit of an author or speaker for the l'edan henre the l'eda could not be reliable. This would strike at the very foundation of the structure of Pūrva-Mīmāṁsa. Then again, if all cognitions were not inherently valid, whence could we have confidence in our own cognitions? Even when the Cognition may be one which is found subsequently to be not in consonance with reality, the Cognition as Cognition remains valid. If it were always neces- sary for the Cognition to be in consonance with the Object, then it would have to be regarded as having the form of that Object, and this is an absurdity. Because, if the Cognition had the form of the Object it would mean that the two are identical; and in that case, how could one be 
be the apprehender and the other the 
( 
80 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
C 
" 
apprehended? Nor is it difficult to distinguish one Cognition from another, when they are formless. Because what is meant by Saṁvēdana' (Cognition or knowledge) that a man has is that there is the manifestation of a special factor of the man's Dharma or Merit which focusses his active cooperation in connection with a certain object, and even though this Manifestation is self- illumined, that does not render its differentiation impossible, as a Cognition is regarded as appertaining to that particular object with regard to which it favours the activity of the cogniser; and as each Cognition tends to active cooperation in connection with a distinct Object, this would afford all the basis that is necessary for its differentiation from other Cognitions. This formlessness too does not imply the absence of all characteristic features. In regard to every entity, it has to be admitted that it possesses that form in which it is actually manifested; no other criterion is possible; and as all Cognitions are manifested simply as 'Cognition,' Cognition can be the only character, or even form, that can belong to it. The form that is cognised belongs always to the Object. 
We have found that Cognition is self-valid, and also self- illumined; which disposes of the view that "Cognition is perceiv- ed through the operation of the Mind, in the same way as Pleasure and Pain are." 
This Idealist view has been answered as follows. (In Brhati Rjuvimalā and Prakaraṇa-Pañchikā, p. 63)-Cognition can never be perceptible; this has been declared by the Bhasya (Text. p. 9) 
wefarm fe acuagfs:, a gfafarur 
-that is, what forms the objective of Sense-perception is the Object, not the Cognition '-This does not mean, however, that the Cognition is never knwn as apprehended: it is certainly appre- hended, but only as Cognition, not as something cognised.- संवित्तयैवहि संवित् संवेद्या न संवेद्यतया – says Prabhākara. If it were cognisable as something cognised, then for every Cogni- tion, it would be necessary to postulate an endless series of Cogni- tions. What is meant by this distinction is that the Cognition, even though cognised, cannot itself form the object (phala) of another act of Cognition - तस्यां कर्मभावो न युक्तः । If it were the object of another Cognition, it would not be self-luminous, and yet we cannot regard the Cognition as entirely unknown or un- 
CHAPTER X PRAMĀŅA 
81 
apprehended; because it is only when the Cognition is apprehended that the Cognition of things becomes possible. The right con- clusion thus is that the Cognition is self-apprehended, and its presence is known by means of Inference. What we apprehend by means of this Inference is not the object, but only the presence of the object : नाप्यनुमानाद् रूपग्रहणं सन्मात्रमाहिश्रमनुमानं भवति - days the Bṛhati. So in the case in question, all the information provided by Inference is that the Cognition is there, the Inference being thus formally stated- The Cognition exists, because we have the apprehension of its Object.' In this way Cognition falls within the purview of Inference, which is one of the Means of Cognition; and it is in this sense that Cognition is held to be Pramēya, Cognisable; but this does not make it Samridya-i.e., Cognisable as an Object.-Prabhakara draws a subtle distinction between (Prameya) (Cognisable) and 'Samrēdya' (object of Cognition)- Samvedana is that Cognition where the form of the object is apprehended, and this can occur only in the case of objects ap- prehended through the senses-In the case of the Prameya,' on the other hand, it is not necessary for any form or figure to be present in consciousness. Thus Cognition cannot be Sam vēdya, and hence also not perceptible; but as having its presence, Or existence, apprehended by means of Inference,-which is one of the Pramanas,it has to be regarded as Prameya. 
"If every Apprehension is valid, then how about Doubtful and Wrong Cognitions? These certainly are not valid, and yet they are Cognitions." 
In answer to the above it is pointed out that the Object of a Cognition is that same thing which is presented to consciousness by it. Thus in the stock-example of Wrong Cognition—“ This is silver "-in reference to a piece of shell-what is presented to consciousness is Silver, which thus is the object of cognition,- and not the Shell, which does not enter into the consciousness at all. For this reason, the Judgment in question is not found to fulfil the conditions of the Wrong Cognition, which has been defined as the Cognition of a thing as something which is not that thing. Because in the Cognition in question, we find that it is not the Shell that is cognised as Silver; what happens is that the Shell is not cognised, it does not enter into consciousness at all; but what does enter the consciousness is the Silver, 
F. 11 
82 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
" 
Though the object present before the eye is the Shell, yet, inas- much as the perceiver fails to notice the distinctive features peculiar to the Shell, and notices only those features that are common to the Shell and the Silver, he fails to apprehend the difference between these two things; this brings to his mind, presents to his consciousness, the Silver. This cognition of Silver thus is due to the non-perception of the difference between Silver and the object before the eye, that is of the distinctive features of any one of the two. The idea of Silver also comes to the mind by the force of memory, which has been aroused by the percep- tion of the properties common to the two things; thus the Silver is remembered; but it is not remembered as (that)-something perceived in the past,-which would have sufficed to differen- ciate the that silver' of the past from this silver before the eyes;-this non-perception of the that '-factor is due to a cer- tain weakness of the Mind. Thus the apprehension of the Silver represented in the Judgment this is Silver has to be regarded as an act of Memory, a mere Remembrance. The Silver, which has entered into consciousness, not being present before the eyes. could not be regarded as perceived; nor are there any factors avail- able that could bring about the inferential or other kinds of valid Cognition of the Silver in the case. Though the Judgment in question is thus found to partake of the dual character of Remembrance and Direct Apprehension,-and as such differs from the ordinary Valid Cognition of Silver, which is wholly Direct Apprehension,'-yet in actual experience, it is not known to be so different; and this for the simple reason that, just as in the case of real Silver, the thing perceived is not cognised as different from Silver, so also in the case in question. Thus in actual experience, there is found to be no difference between the right and the wrong Cognition of Silver: specially as both equally give rise to the same kind of activity on the part of the cogniser, in both cases he stoops to pick up the thing. 
-- 
C 
In the other instance of Wrong Cognition- the Conch-shell is yellow '-what happens is this: The yellowness that is per- ceived is quite real, present in the bile that has affected the eyes,- the whiteness of the conch-shell fails to be perceived on account of the same bile which has beset the eyes; .. thus what is perceived is the conch-shell without any colour,--and the yellow- ness that is perceived is perceived without the object to which it 
CHAPTER X: PRAMĀŅA 
83 
belongs, as the bile in the eye cannot be seen; thus a colourless object (conch-shell) and an objectless colour (yellowness) being perceived at the same time,-both these coguitions being quite valid so far-what more natural than that the two perceptions should coalesce, and present to consciousness the yellow conch- shell? Even when picked up, the conch is found to be yellow; so that in this cognition of the yellow conch we do not find any- thing that would make it wrong: in fact the man comes to regard the Cognition as wrong only when he comes to know of the disease (Bile) in the eye. 
In the same manner in the perception of two Moons, the rays of light issue from the two eyes. . . not simultaneously, but al slightly different points of time; hence it is only natural that the two images of the Moon are produced and imprinted on the retina, and as such presented to the man's consciousness. Thus in this case also, there are two distinct perceptions of the same Moon; but the interval of time between the appearance of the two images on the retina being very subtle, the two coalesce and give rise to the single cognition of two moons.' 
C 
In Dream-Cognition also, even though things are only re- membered-and not directly perceived, yet they appear in con- sciousness as actually apprehended at the time: and what occurs is that the factor of having been apprehended at some previous time is lost sight of, under the effects of sleep; and it is this factor only that differenciates what is remembered from what is apprehended. Then as regard the agencies that energise or excite the impres- sions that bring about the Remembrance,--this is supplied by some Unseen Force which guides the percipient or dreaming souls in their earthly sojourn. If the time during which the man sleeps is one at which he is destined to experience pleasure, the Unseen Agency of his Karma energises the impressions that bring to his mind pleasant memories, and consequently pleasant Dreams; similarly with painful Dreams. This accounts for the fact that Dreams are sometimes pleasant, sometimes painful. This feeling of pleasure or pain,-so far as the actual feeling is concerned,-is as real as any that is experienced during waking consciousness. 
Thus it is found that whenever there is actual Apprehension or Cognition, there is nothing wrong in it; and that the wrongness 
84 
PURVA-MIMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
comes in only when an element of Remembrance creeps into the Cognition, through some cause or the other. Thus none of the instances of so-called Wrong Cognition militate against the self-validity of Cognitions. 
As regards Doubtful Cognitions," Is this a pillar or a man?"-what is actually perceived, and enters the consciousness, is only some object endowed with the quality of tallness; and this is quite valid so far:-this perception of tallness then reminds the man of a number of tall things--the pillar, the mau, the tree and so forth. Then it is that there comes the doubt as to whether it is this or that particular tall thing. Thus in all doubtful cog- nitions there are two remembrances involved--and not only one act of Apprehension. Hence this also leaves the self-validity of cognitions untouched. 
(B) THE BHATTA VIEW REGARDING COGNITION AND ITS 
VALIDITY. 
The question that arises next is in regard to the validity of Cognitions. Is this Validity inherent in the Cognition itself or something extraneous to itself? There are four alternative views that have been held on this question. 
These have been thus set forth in the Shlokāvārtika (Sā. 2, 33 et seq.)In regard to all Cognitions we have to consider this-- (a) Are Validity and Invalidity both inherent in the Cognition? or (b) are both these extraneous? or (c) is Invalidity inherent and Validity is extraneous? or (d) is Validity inherent and Invalidity extraneous? Validity is held to be extraneous when it is held to be due to, and brought about by, the defectless efficiency of the agency that brought about the Cognition: and similarly Invali- dity is held to be extraneous when it is held to be due to defects in the agency that brought about the Cognition. 
(a) The view that both Validity and Invalidity are inherent in Cognition cannot be accepted, because the two are naturally contradictory and as such cannot belong to the same Cognition. (b) Nor can both Validity and Invalidity be wholly extraneous; as, if they went so, the Cognition by itself would be neither valid nor invalid; it would bear no character at all. Whenever a Cog- 
CHAPTER X: PRAMANA 
86 
nition appears, until the cogniser has had time to find out if it has been due to true and efficient causes or to false and defective causes, --the Cognition would be regarded as neither valid nor invalid: 1 if it is neither, then it is as good as non-existent. (c) The third view is that by its nature, Cognition by itself must be regarded as invalid, its Validity alone being due to extraneous circumstances; the argument in support of this view is that Invalidity, being negative in character, cannot be due to, and brought about by, any extra- neous causes,-while Validity, being positive, can be brought about by efficient causes. On the other hand, if Cognitions were inherently valid and their Invalidity were due to extraneous causes,-then even Dream-Cognition would have to be regarded as valid. Under our view, there can be no Validity in Dream- Cognitions, because there are not efficient causes present which could bring about the Validity. Hence the conclusion is that the Validity of Cognitions is due to the efficiency of the causes, while by themselves, Cognitions are inherently invalid.--The point of this third view is that the Validity of valid cognitions also should depend upon the efficiency and consequent reliability of the person who spoke the word-and as, in the case of the Veda, there is no author or speaker according to the Mimāmsaka, there could be no reliability and hence the Veda could ont be a reliable source of knowledge regarding Duty, Dharma. 
(d) It is on this account that the Mimamsaka has insisted upon the fourth view, that all Cognitions are inherently valid, and it is only Invalidity that is imposed upon them from without, when it is found that its source has been defective. It is agreed that if Validity were wholly non-existent in the Cognition, it could not be produced therein by anything else. Under the view that the Validity of the Cognition is due to the efficiency of its source, to what could the Validity of the Cognition of this effi- ciency be due? It could only be due to another Cognition of the efficiency of the source of this second Cognition; and so on and on, there would be an infinite regress. On the other hand, if Validity belongs to the Cognition by itself, then there would be no need of any other Cognitions; specially as any idea of its Invalidity could not appear, for the simple reason that there would be no Cognition of any defect in the source of the initial Cognition. The conclusion therefore is that the Cognition is valid qua Cognition, and this Talidity can be set aside only when one 
86 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
comes to perceive a defect in its source (Shlo. Fa. Sū. 2, 53 et. sey.). 
The Shastradi pikā (pp. 37-38) makes the following remarks:--- (1) The perception of an object leads, not to a further cognition of that perception, but to the Aparoksya, the prakaţată, i.e.. direct apprehensibility-of that object, and (2) every act of Per- ception involves a certain relationship between the Perceiver and the Perceived,--the former being the active agent and the latter the objective of that act of Perception; this agent-object rela- Fionship is not possible without some activity on the part of the agent; hence the presence of this relationship leads to the inference of its invariable concomitant, the action of the agent; and it is this action which, in the case of knowledge, is known as Cognis- ing; the mentally perceived relationship between the cognising Soul and the cognised Object leads to the inference of the act of knowing or cognising. 
6 
This Cognition is a Vikriya, Modification, of the Soul,—and this is not inconsistent with the Eternity of the Soul,-says Kumārila (Shlo, Va. Perception, 52-53). 
As regards Wrong Cognitions, the Bhāṭṭa view is as follows:- In so far as the judgment this is silver involves a Cognition per se, it is quite valid; it is quite valid for the cogniser at the time that he has the Cognition; that it is sublated or rejected by subsequent experience is another matter; the subsequent experi- ence must be regarded as destroying the Validity that belonged to the Cognition as cognised - तस्मात् स्वतः प्रामाण्यं प्राप्तम् अर्थान्यथात्वका- रणदोषज्ञानाभ्यामपोद्यते इत्यवश्य मङ्गीकरणायम् । ( Shāstradāpika, p. 15. 
line 15.) Aud again - यत्र प्रयत्नेनान्विष्यमाणोऽपि कारणदोषो बाधकज्ञानं वा नोपलभ्यते तत् प्रमाणम् - - इतरच्चाप्रमाणम् । (Shastradipika, p. 31, line 5.) 
As regards Dream-Cognition, says the Shashtradipikā (p. 39, line 10)-- 
C 
In Dreams also, what is cognised is the external object as perceived elsewhere and presented to consciousness during sleep by an Unseen Agency; the Cognition is quite valid so far as the object is concerned, the wrongness or Invalidity comes in only when it is regarded as something actually apprehended at the time, and not as only remembered. And the cause of this lies in such 
CHAPTER X: PRAMĀŅA 
87 
discrepancies as are due to sleep. Thus the Invalidity pertains only to the accessory details, not to the Cognition as Cognition. 
According to Kumārila, it is a necessary condition in the Validity of a Cognition that its object should be one that is not already known. 
Kumārila appears to have been much misunderstood in regard to his views on the Self-Validity of Cognition. Nearly all later writers have declared that he is not an upholder of the inherent Self-Validity of Cognition. Without entering into a lengthy discussion on this point, we shall only quote the words of Kumarila himself:- 
On p. 54 of the Shlokavārtika (Chodana-Sutra, 33) the ques- tion to be discussed is thus propounded, 
सर्वविज्ञानविषयमिदं तावत् परीक्ष्यताम् । 
प्रमाणत्वाप्रमाणत्वे स्वतः किं परतोऽथवा ॥ 
"In regard to all Cognitions, this has to be considered,- Are Validity and Invalidity inherent in them or extraneous? " 
The conclusion is in no unmistakable terms as under on p. 59, 
स्वतः सर्वप्रमाणानां प्रामाण्यमवधार्यताम् । 
It should be understood that the Validity of all Means for Forms) of Cognition is inherent in them." 
And on p. 61 
तस्माद् बोधात्मकत्वेन प्राप्ता बुद्ध: प्रमाणता । 
अन्यथा त्वहेतुत्थदोषज्ञानादपोद्यते ॥ 
"Thus it follows that every Cognition, as Cognition, must be valid; this validity may be set aside if subsequently it is found that it has had its source in some defect in the Cognitive Process as evidenced by the object cognised being in reality otherwise than as apprehended by the Cognition in question." 
In this discussion people have confounded the issues by mix- ing up the question of what is Pramāņa, the Means of Cognition, and what its Phala, Resultant '; though on this point Kumārila is not at all particular-He says (Shlo. Va. Pratyakṣa, 51) 
C 
प्रमाणफलभावश्च यथेष्टं परिकल्प्यताम् ।88 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
"As regards what is the Means and what the Resultant it might be assumed just as one chooses." 
But even on this point of 
his view clearly as follows-—- 
LL 
प्रमाणफलभाव 
विशेषणे तु बोद्धप्ये यदालोचनमात्नकम् । 
प्रसूते निश्चयं पश्चात् तस्य प्रामाण्यकल्पना | निश्चयस्तु फलं तत्र .... 
he sets forth 
ganfegfamadı xarui àg fartbereft: 11 (Ibid., p. 71–73.) 
When we come to examine the details, we find that the mere vague indeterminate Cognition which brings about the definite Cognition is the Means, and the Definite Cognition is the Resultant. In case this latter is regarded as the Means, then the notion of the acceptability or rejectability of the cognised thing is to be regarded as its Resultant." 
There has been a confusion in people's minds regarding this point between (a) Sratraḥpramāņa "Self-valid " and (b) Svaprakāsha," "Self-illumined." In regard to (a) all Mimari sakas are agreed; it is only in regard to (b) that there is some difference of opinion as shown later on. 
(c) MURARI MISHRA'S VIEW. 
According to Murări Mishra, Cognition is perceived, pratyakṣa-says the Nyayakustubha; and the ralidity of the Cogni- tion is also made known by those sanie circumstances and implements that bring about the Cognition itself; it is not due to anything extraneous to the Cognition. He is as much the upholder of Srataḥ-prāmānya as Kumarila. According to Murări, the validity of the Cognition is apprehended by the Representative Cognition that follows in the wake of every Cognition; e.g., the idea "I see the jar" which follows after the seeing of the Jar.-Says Tardhamana in his gloss on the Kusumāñjali.—According to Murāri Mishra, like the Cognition itself, the Validity of the Cognition also is apprehended through the Mind. 
These three views of the three Mimumsakas-Prabhakara, Kumārila, and Murāri Mishra-are found summed up by Pakṣa- 
CHAPTER X: PRAMĀŅA 
89 
dhara Mishra in his Aloka, with the remark that-" There is this factor common in the views of all the three Mimämsakas-that the validity of Cognition is apprehended through precisely those conditions that bring about the Cognition itself; (a) under Gurumata, it is apprehended through its self-luminous character, (b) under Bhaṭṭamata, through Inference based on its being apprehended, and (c) under Murărimata, through the Representative Cognition." (Palm leaf Ms., Benares Sanskrit College, 15a-15b). 
Herein may lie the clue to the saying - मुरारेस्मृतीयः पन्थाः । 
F. 12 
CHAPTER XI 
DIFFERENT KINDS OF VALID COGNITION: 
PERCEPTION 
Valid Cognition has been classed by the Mimamsaka under six (by Prabhakara, only five) heads, viz.: 
(1) Perceptional, 
(2) Inferential, 
(3) Scriptural (Vedic), 
(4) Analogical, 
(5) Presumptive, and 
(6) Negational. 
(A) SHABARA'S VIEWS. 
That Cognition by men which appears when there is contact of the sense-organs is "Sense-perception," says the Sutra (1.1.4). 
The following explanations are provided by Shabara (Trans- lation, page 8 et seq.).-What is meant is, that Perception is Cognition which a man has when his Sense-organs are in contact with the Object cognised;-it is the cognition of an Object which is actually present at the time. Hence it cannot be the Means of Knowing Dharma.-The only factor meant to be stressed is the fact of its being such as is possible only when there is contact between the Sense-organ and the Object. 
(P. 10)-What is real Perception is never wrong, and what is wrong is not Perception. What is real Perception has been shown in the Sutra (1.1.4), the meaning of which is that "That Cognition is real Perception which appears when there is contact of the Sense-organs with the object perceived;" that is to say, when the Sense-organ are in contact with the Object actually perceived, the resultant Cognition of the man is real Perception, and it is not real Perception when the Object per- ceived is different from that with which the Sense-organ is in contact. (Therefore, in a case where the Shell is cognised as 
90 
CHAPTER XI: PERCEPTION 
91 
Silver, what is cognised is the Silver, while what is in contact with the sense-organ is the Shell; hence this is not a case of real Perception at all.) 
(P. 11)-When it is found that, at the time of Perception there is no contact of the Sense-organ concerned with any Object other than the one perceived, it follows that the perception has appeared on the actual contact of the Object actually perceived; and when the contrary is the case, the Perception is taken as following upon contact with something other than the Object perceived. In cases where a Perception is subsequently followed Ly a sublative Cognition to the contrary,-such as "in reality it is not as I have perceived it, this Perception has been wrong,' it is understood that the Perception in question had appeared on the contact of the Sense-organ with something other than the Object perceived; while in cases where no such sublative Cogni- tion appears it is understood that the Perception had appeared on actual contact with the object perceived. 
** 
Q. How can this distinction be made before the sublating Cognition appears? At the time that a certain Perception comes, there is nothing to differentiate a right Cognition from a wrong one, until the subsequent appearance or otherwise of the sublative Cognition." 
A. A Cognition is wrong,-(a) when the Mind is affected by some sort of derangement,-or (b) when the Sense-organ concerned is beset by disabilities,-or (c) when the object itself suffers from such disabilities as being too small for perception and so forth. In cases where none of these three,-Mind, Sense-organ and Object, suffers from these defects, the Cognition is right. What brings about a right Cognition is the contact of the Sense-organ, the Mind and the Object; when there is no such contact, the Cognition is wrong. Ilence what leads to wrong Cognition is a 
defect in one or the other of the three factors concerned-Mind, Sense-organ and Object. That this is so is learnt from the fact that on the disappearance of the defects, there appears that Cognition which is recognised by all persons as right. Whether or not any of the three factors is defective is ascertained when, even on careful scrunity, a defect not being detected, it is con- cluded that there is no defect,--simply because there is nothing to show that there is a defect. From all this it follows that only 
92 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
C 
that Cognition is wrong the means whereof are defective, or with regard to which there is a sublative Cognition that it is wrong;' and no other Cognition can be regarded as wrong. 
(Pp. 12-15)-Perception is not devoid of real basis in the external world; nor is it a void; it has a real substratum in the external world . . . . Thus the conclusion is that Perception is never false or wrong. 
(B) PRABHAKARA'S VIEWS ON PERCEPTION. 
(Prakaraṇa-Pañchika-p. 52 et seq.)-Perception is direct ap- prehension Sākṣāt pratitiḥ;" it envisages the Apprehended Object, the Apprehended Person, and the Apprehension itself. In each act of Perception therefore the idea of each of these factors enters as its constituent factor. [This distinctive view of Percep- tion has been called the "Tripuți-pratyakṣa-vāda," i.e., the Doctrine of Tripartite Perception.] Direct Perception envisaging the apprehended Object proceeds directly from Sense-contact. The number of Sense-organs is six,-1. Olfactory, for the perceiving of odour; 2. Visual, for the perceiving of colour and form; 3. Gestatory, for the perceiving of taste; 4. Tactile, for the per- ceiving of touch; 5. Auditory, for the perceiving of sound; and 6. the Internal Organ or Mind, for the perceiving of such purely mental states as those of pleasure, pain and the like. 
As a matter of ordinary experience, it is found that our Cognitions of things are not ever-lasting; they appear at only certain times. Thus, being ephemeral, they must have some Cause. Every Effect has two kinds of Causes,-the Material or Constituent Cause, to which it owes its material composition, and the Immaterial cause, which, in most cases, takes the form of certain qualities, conditions or circumstances which, in proximity with, and through, the Material Cause, help in the bringing about of the effect. For instance, the Material Cause of the Jar is the clay-particles that compose it, and the conjunction of those particles is its Immaterial Cause. The Immaterial Cause of an effect may subsist either in its Material Cause, or in the Material Cause of that Material Cause. In the case of Perceptions, 
have the Percipient Soul as 
as the Constituent Cause, and when we seek 
we seek for its Immaterial Cause, we find that there 
we 
CHAPTER XI: PERCEPTION 
93 
cannot be anything subsisting in the Cause of the Soul, as the Soul, being eternal, can have no Cause; hence the Immaterial Cause sought after must be something subsisting in the Soul. itself; further, as it is only a quality that can subsist in a Sub- stance, it follow that the Immaterial Cause of Perception must be a quality; then again, we know that Perception which is a particular kind of Cognition, is a "specific" quality of the Soul, and also that for such a quality belonging to 
to an eternal Sub- stance, the Immaterial Cause must be in the form of contact with some other substance; for example, the colour produced in the Earth-atom has, for its Immaterial Cause, the contact with Fire; from this it follows that Cognition must have for its Immaterial Cause, its contact with some other substance; and inasmuch as we have nothing to show that the other substance is something subsisting in yet another substance, we conclude that the Sub- stance whose contact would be the Immaterial cause of Cognition must be one that has an existence independent of other Substances. Of such independent substances, there are two kinds-(1) Those that are all-pervading in character,-as Time, Space, etc., and (2) Atoms. It is a well-known fact that no contact (which, by its very nature, must be ephemeral) with an all-pervading sub- stance can be brought about by any Cause, as an all-pervading substance is in permanent contact with all things; hence it can- not be said to come or be brought into contact with anything. Nor can their eternal contact be the Cause of anything; as being eternal, it could bring about only eternal effects, which is a con- tradiction in terms.-From all this it follows that the Contact which is the Immaterial Cause of Perception must be one that subsists in something atomic; the contact of atomic substances is brought about by the action-movement-of the Atoms themselves; Atoms can move up to one or more substances, thereby creating so many contacts for themselves, one after the other.-This Atomic Substance again must reside in the body ensouled by the perceiv ing Soul; as none other could contain the substratum of the Immaterial cause of the Perception of which that Soul is the Material or Constituent cause. The action of the Atomic Sub- stance in the body,-tending to bring about the contact-is due to its coming into contact with the Soul which (in every act of Cognition) puts forth an effort towards the act of cognising. The only Atomic Substance that fulfils these conditions is the Manas, 
94 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
the Internal Organ. This Manas alone by itself, brings about such effects as Cognitions, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion, Effort and so forth; it also brings about Remembrance when aided by Impres- sions left by past Cognitions. 
Thus we arrive at the conclusion that the Manas or Mind, by itself, is found to be devoid of any such qualities as Colour, Odour and the rest, and, as such, it cannot lead the Soul to experience or cognise these qualities; hence for this, it stands in need of such other organs as may be characterised by these qualities; for the perception of Colour, for instance, the Mind will need the aid of an organ of which Colour is the distinctive quality; for the perception of Odour, the help of an Odorous Organ; and so on, with the perceptions of Touch, Sound, and Taste. Now we know that the organ of which Colour is the distinctive quality must be one constituted by Tejas or Light; as Colour is a feature of Light; and this proves the existence of the Luminous Organ, the Organ of Vision, as leading to the perception of Colour. Similarly the Organ with Odour as its distinctive quality must be one composed of Earth; as it is to Earth alone that Odour belongs; and this proves the existence of the Earthly Organ, the Olfactory Organ, which leads to the perception of Odour. The organ with Taste as its distinctive quality must be composed of Water, as it is to Water that Taste belongs; this proves the existence of the Aqueous Organ, the Gestatory Organ, which leads to the perception of Taste. The Organ with Sound as its distinguishing feature must be composed of Akasha, as it is to Akasha that Sound belongs; this proves the existence of the Akashic Organ, the Auditory Organ; which leads to the perception of Sound. Lastly, the Organ having Touch for its distinguishing quality must be com- posed by Air, as it is to Air that Touch belongs; and this proves the existence of the Airy Organ, the Tactile Organ, which leads to the perception of Touch. 
Contact of the Mind is regarded as a necessary factor in the Perceptions by means of all the Sense-Organs; because of the fact that, even when the object to be perceived is in close contact with the Sense-Organs concerned, it fails to be perceived, if at the same time the said Organ also is not in contact with the Mind; that is, if the man is Absent-Minded. Thus in the case of all perceptions. there are four contacts necessary:- 
CHAPTER XI: PERCEPTION 
95 
(1) Contact of the object with the Sense-Organ; (2) that of the distinctive qualities of the object with the Sense- 
Organ; (3) that of the Sense-Organ with the Mind; (4) that of the Mind with the Soul. 
In the perception of Pleasure and Pain and such other purely mental or subjective states, only two contacts are required, that of the Pleasure with the Mind and that of the Mind with the Soul. 
(B) As regards the Object Apprehended by Perception, it has been classed under three heads:- 
(1) Substances, (2) Universal (Class or Community) and 
(3) Qualities. 
To the first category belong such substances as are tangible and of sufficiently large dimensions (substances other than these being imperceptible) partaking of the nature of Earth, Water, Air and Fire. To the third category of Qualities, belong such quali- ties as 
Colour, Taste, Odour, Touch, Number, Dimensions, Separateness, Conjunction, Disjunction, Priority, Posteriority, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion and Effot,-all which are per- ceptible. How the second category of Universal' or Class' is perceptible has been already explained above. 
C 
(B) As regards the third factor in Perception, viz., the Apprehension itself-it has been divided into two classes: 
(1) Sarikalpaka, Determinate, Conceptual, (2) Nirvikalpaka, 
Non-Determinate, Non-Conceptual.' 
4 
In regard to the Nirvikalpaka, 'Non-Conceptual,' Percep- tion, the view of Prabhakara is the golden mean between two extreme views. He does not accept the Bauddha view that what forms the object of Perception is the mere 'Svalakṣaṇa,' the 'Specific Individuality,' of the thing apprehended by it; and his reason for rejecting this view is that, as a matter of fact, the Non- Conceptual Perception does apprehend the class-character, the Universal, also, of the thing: Nor does he accept the Bhatta view that in Non-Conceptual Perception, neither the Class- character nor the Specific Individuality is presented to Conscious- ness, all that is presented is the Object by itself, pure and simple. wherein these two subsist' (Shlo.-Va.-Su. 4, 113). Nor does Prabhakara accept the view that it is only the Class-Character 
C 
96 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
that is apprehended, because he finds that after all, the Object is apprehended as an individual, and not merely as belonging to a class. Having rejected these views, Prabhakara accepts the view that what is apprehended in the first, or non-conceptual, state of Perception is both the Class-Character (the Universal) and the Specific Individuality; but with this difference that, in- asmuch as no other object has as yet entered into the Apprehen- sion, the thing is not apprehended as actually being an individual belonging to a definite class; because a thing can be cognised as an Individual only in comparison to, or in relation with, other things, and cognised as an Individual' only in comparison with other things; and so it follows that so long as no other thing has presented itself to consciousness, even though what is apprehended is actually an Individual belonging to a Class, this mixed character of the thing cannot be fully comprehended until some other things have entered into consciousness, until which time the Perception remains non-determiate, non-conceptual. (See Brhati, pp. 50 et seq.) 
C 
As regards the other, the Savikalpaka or Conceptual, Deter- minate, Perception,-it follows in the wake of the Non-Conceptual Perception, and apprehends the same object as actually being an Individual possessed of some well-defined specific features pecu- liar to itself and also certain class-characteristics in common with other things, and thus belonging to that Universal,' 'Class' or Community.' (See Brihati, p. 50.) The object in contact with the organ of Perception is one, only one Individual thing, and no other things; and hence it may be questioned how the Perception can apprehend it as an Individual possessed of the said class-characteristics, etc.,-which presupposes the apprehen- sion of things other than the one in contact with the Sense-organ concerned. But the fact of the matter is that what really appre- hends the object is neither the Perception, nor the Sense-organ, but the Soul which, by its very nature, apprehends all that can be apprehended; hence what happens is that, just after the Soul has had the Non-Conceptual Perception of the thing, there come to the Mind those other things also those from which it differs and also those with whom it has certain characteristics in common; and this accounts for the aforesaid mixed character of Conceptual Perception. 
CHAPTER XI; 1 ERCEPTION 
97 
This Conceptual Perception, even though apprehending the same thing as that apprehended by the preceding Non-Conceptual Perception, is yet a valid Cognition; inasmuch as it also appre- hends certain such factors as had not figured in the Non-Concep- tual Perception. Though there is a certain element of Remem- berance in this Conceptual Perception, that appertains to the other things in relation to the Object perceived,-not to this Object itself, hence so far as the Object is concerned, that Element of Remembrance does not vitiate the validity of the Perception. 
The second factor entering into Perception is the 'Appre- hender.' In all Cognitions-be they either Direct Apprehension or Remembrance, the Apprehender always figures as an essen- tial factor; so long as the apprehending Soul does not become manifest, there is no Apprehension at all; because all Cognitions are in the form I know.' It must be admitted therefore that whenever anything is cognised, it is cognised along with the Cogniser; and the Cognition of the Cognising Soul is always of the nature of Direct Apprehension. Even when the Cognition of the object is Inferential or Verbal, the cognition of the Cognis- ing Soul is, in every act of Cognition. 
of Cognition, purely Direct or Perceptional, obtained through the agency and contact of the Mind. 
> 
The factor of Apprehension also is always self-cognised by Direct Apprehension (see above).-even the Inferential or the Verbal Cognition is apprehended by itself directly. 
Though all these three factors-Apprehension, Apprehended and Apprehender-figure in every act of Precption, yet there is this difference that, so far as the Apprehender-Soul-and the Apprehended Object-are concerned, these are something different from the Apprehension itself, while the Apprehension is not different from itself. The reason for this lies in the very nature of things. The Apprehension being of the 
the nature of Light, Illumination or Manifestation, does not stand in need of any other thing to manifest it or make it apprehended; it is therefore Self-apprehended; the Apprehender-Soul-and the Apprehended Object, on the other hand, are not of the nature of Light or Illumination; hence for the manifestation of these they require something different from themselves, which is of the nature of Light. That the Apprehender-Soul-and the Apprehended- 
F. 1398 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Object-are not of the nature of Light is proved in the following 
manner: 
We know, as a matter of fact, that in the waking state, both the Apprehender and the Object figure in the Apprehension; but neither of these really figures in the Apprehension during deep sleep; and yet it cannot be denied that they are there all the time. The fact of their being there, and yet not appearing in Consciousness, proves that they are not of the nature of Light. The case of the Apprehension on the other hand is totally different; whenever and wherever it exists, it is self-manifest and self- apprehended; it is thus neither like the Apprehender nor like the Apprehended Object, both of which are never apprehended except through the Apprehension. 
( 
As regards the question of Pramana and Phala, Prabhakara holds that if the term Pramāņa' be taken to mean that which is cognised,-i.e., the Cognition itself, then it is this Cognition itself that is the Pramana, Valid Cognition; and in this case the Phala-the Resultant, Effect,-would consist in either the accept- ance or the rejection by the Cognising Agent, of the object Cognised, or his indifference towards it-these three being the attitudes taken by the Cogniser towards the things that he cognises. If, on the other hand, the term Pramana is taken as that by which something is cognised,'-.e., the Means of Cognition;- then the name 'Pramāņa' would apply to the Mind-Soul Contact (which is the element common to all cognitions); and in this case, the Cognition itself would be the Phala,' the Resultant. So also in the case of the name Pramana' being applied either to the cognising Sense-Organ or to the Contact with the Mind,-the Cognition itself would be the Phala, as it is towards this result that all the said agencies are operative. 
C 
" 
C 
C 
(C) BHATTA VIEW OF PERCEPTION. 
There are six Sense-Organs (as according to Prabhakara) (Shāstradīpikā, p. 21). The contact of these and the process of perception have been described under Sense-Organs above. As a matter of common experience, when an Object is first. perceived-be it a Substance or Quality or a Universal' it is perceived in its own pure form, free from all distinctive features; our own experience is the sole criterion and authority for the view 
C 
C 
CHAPTER XI: PERCEPTION 
C 
99 
that whenever the Object comes within the range of our Sense- Organs, and our Mind is not absent,' we perceive the Object by itself the Cognition that appears of it is a mere Alochana or Simple Perception, called 'nirvikalpaka,' Non-conceptual-apper- taining to the Object itself pure and simple, resembling the cognition by a new-born infant. (Shlo. Va. Pratyakṣa 112.)-This has been called Nirvikalpaka-pratyakṣa, Non-conceptual Percep- tion. This is followed by a fuller perception of the thing as having certain distinctive features such as belonging to a certain Community or Universal,' bearing a certain name and so forth. The former is somewhat indistinct and the latter quite distinct; the latter is called Savikalpaka-Pratyaksa,' Conceptual Percep- tion. Some people have held that this latter is the only Percep- tion and there is no Non-conceptual Perception. But this is contrary to all experience. What is apprehended by the Non- conceptual Perception is a vague undefined sort of something' which might embrace any number of things; while what is apprehended by the Conceptual Perception is a definite thing with its own individual characteristics.-(Shās tradīpikā, pp. 22-24.) (See Shlo. Va. Pratyakṣa, pp. 112, 120 et seq.) Both are Percep- tion' because Sense-born (Nya.' Ratna, p. 175). 
C 
1 
C 
C 
On the question of what is Pramana and what its Phala, Kumārila is not very particular. (Shlo, Va. Pratyakṣa, p. 59.) He apparently accepts the view of Prabhakara, which appears to be the commonsense view. (See Shlo. Vā. Pratyakṣa, p. 70 et. seq.) Pleasure etc. are amenable to Sense-Perception, through the instrumentality of the Mind, which is a 'Sense-Organ.' (Ibid., p. 83.) 
C 
As regards Yogic' (Mystic) Perception, some people have held that these apprehend even past and future things,-also those that are too subtle or are hidden from view and too remote and so forth. They argue that in view of this fact, Perception cannot be regarded as restricted to things present only. The answer to this is that the Perception of the Mystic also cannot differ from the Perception of the ordinary man; and so long as it is Perception, it must appertain to things present only; and what does not pertain to present things cannot be regarded as Perception. Such Cogni- tions may be regarded as Intuitional,' due to Pratibha, Intuition; but such intuitional Cognition cannot be always free from doubt. (Ibid., pp. 26-37.) 
C 
— 
CHAPTER XII 
ANUMANA: INFERENCE 
(A) SHABARA'S VIEW. 
[Shabara-Bhāṣya-Trs., p. 15]-When the Perception of one factor of a well-recognised relationship (of Invariable Concomit- ance) leads to the cognition of the other factor of that relation- ship, which latter is not in contact with the person's Sense- Organs, this second Cognition is what is called Anumāna,' Inference,' (Inferential Cognition). Inference and the other forms of Cognition also presuppose, and are based upon; Sense- Perception. (Trs., p. 8.) 
What is meant is that the cognition of the permanent relation- ship between two things helps in the Inferential Cognition by providing to the Agent the idea of the other factor of the relation- ship when one factor is cognised; when the observer perceives a certain thing, and recalls to his mind the permanent relationship that that thing has been known to bear to another thing, this recalled idea of the relationship presents to his mind the appre- hension of the other factor of that relationship, and to this appre- hension is given the name Inferential Cognition.'-(Prakaraṇa- pañchikā, p. 74.) 
[Shabara-Bhāṣya, p. 15]-This Inferential Cognition is of two kinds: (1) That based upon the Directly-perceived relationship, and (2) that based upon a generalised relationship; as an instance of the former, we have the Inferential Cognition of Fire following from the Cognition of Smoke (which is based upon the invariable concomitance of Smoke and Fire, which has been directly perceiv- ed in the Kitchen); and as an example of the second kind of Inferential Cognition, we have the case where, finding that the Sun changes its position, we infer that the Sun is moving,'—on the ground of our experience that, in the case of the person Devadatta, we have found that it is only after he moves that he changes his position; which experience has led us to the generalised Premiss that whenever an object changes its posi- tion, it moves;' and it is on this generalised premiss that the Inference of the Sun's movement is based. 
100 
C 
CHAPTER XII: ANUMANA: INFERENCE 
(B) PRABHAKARA VIEW OF INFERENCE. 
101 
[Rjuvimalā, p. 49]-The relationship upon which Inference is based must be one that is Unfailing, ever true and permanent; e.g., that which subsists between Cause and Effect, between Whole and Part, between Substance and Quality, between Quali- ties subsisting in the same Substance, and so forth: for instance, the relationship between Fire (Cause) and Smoke (Effect). 
[Ṛjuvimalā, p. 95]-Question “What is that Means of Knowledge by which we obtain the right knowledge of the perma- nent and unfailing character of the said relationship? It cannot be known through Perception, which is operative only in regard to the things in the present and in contact with the Sense-Organs. Nor could it be known through Inference or Presumption, as both of these also would, in their turn, depend upon like relationships, which would thus involve an infinite regress.-Nor lastly could it be known through Perception obtained through the instrument- ality of the Mind alone (irrespectively of Sense-Contact); because if the Mind alone by itself were to bring about such Cognitions, then men would become omniscient; and there would be no limi- tation upon the reach and functioning of the Mind." 
This difficulty has been met in the following manner:-The relationship is cognised through that same Means of Cognition by which the members of the relationship are cognised; e.g., between Fire and Smoke, all relationships are cognised by means of Perception through the Senses; the relationships being appre- hended as qualifications belonging to the two things (Fire and Smoke), which latter are perceived by themselves. The particular time and place also are perceived as qualifying adjuncts of those same things. Thus it is that Fire and Smoke become perceived as qualified by a qualifying Relationship and by certain speci- fications of Time and Place. The next stage in the process is the recognition of the fact that while, in some cases, Fire is found to be concomitant with Smoke, there are instances where it is not so; e.g., in the case of the Red-hot Iron; this gives rise to the conviction that the Relationship (of concomitance) of Fire with Smoke is not constant, but qualified by variations of Time and Place; as for Smoke, on the other hand, it is never found apart from Fire; and this gives rise to the conviction that Smoke is always, invariably, concomitant with Fire; that is, the said 
102 
PÜRVA-MÏMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Relationship of Smoke and Fire is contant. After this conviction has dawned upon the mind, all that is needed for the forthcoming Inferential Cognition (of Fire) is the apprehension of the mere existence of Smoke; for which apprehension alone there is need for the operation of a Means of Cognition; and when once this exis- tence has been apprehended, the idea of 
of the connection and presence of Fire follows naturally from the pre-conceived notion of the said relationship between Fire and Smoke. Thus then all that is needed for the apprehension of the Inferential Cognition is supplied by Sense-Perception itself. This view may be open to the objection that, under the above explanation, the Cognition of Smoke would include within itself the Cognition of Fire also, and thus there would be nothing left unknown which would be cog- nised by the resultant Inferential Cognition; and this last would therefore cease to be Valid Cognition, Pramāņa. This objection. would have had some force against the Prabhakara, only if Pramāņa, Valid Cognition, had been defined as that which affords the cognition of something not already cognised. As a matter of fact however Prabhakara does not make this a necessary condition in the Validity of a Cognition; he defines it simply as Apprehen- sion, and certainly the Cognition of Fire following upon the Cognition of Smoke is Apprehension.' Then again, in all cases of Inferential Cognition, the previous knowledge of the relation- ship between the Subject' and the 
and the Probans is absolutely necessary; and hence Inferential Cognition must always pertain to things already known. The reason why Inferential Cognition 
does not appear in regard to each and every thing known to us lies in the fact that there can be no Cognition of any sort unless the Agent wishes it (i.e., has his mind turned towards it); and in a case where all that we wish to know regarding a certain thing is already known by other and simpler means of knowledge, there is no occasion for us to recall to our minds the various relation- ships borne by the thing concerned; and hence the idea of the relationship not being before the Mind, no Inferential Cognition ensues. (Vide Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 76.) 
C 
C 
C 
J 
The very definition of Inferential Cognition serves to indicate all the more important defects in the Inferential process,-which defects have been called ' Hētvābhāsa,' Defective or Fallacious Reason. For 
For instance, (a) the condition that the relationship between the two factors must be one that has been previously 
J 
CHAPTER XII: ANUMĀNA: INFERENCE 
C 
103 
known precludes the Asādhārana or Too Specific Reason (Probans). As a matter of fact, the character that belongs speci- fically to the 'Subject' cannot form the basis of any valid Inference; because such a character could not have been perceived any- where else, and thus this character along wtih the Subject could never be known as related to any third object, and yet it is the relationship to this third object that forms the essence of an Inferential conclusion. For example, the Earth is related to Odorousness by such a peculiar relationship that that relation- ship cannot indicate the Earth as being related to anything other than the said Odorousness.—(b) The condition that there must be a clear relationship between the two factors' precludes the 'Badhita' Anulled Probans; e.g., when the eternality of Word- Sound is sought to be established on the basis of its being an Effect, it is found that no positive relationship is possible between the character of Eternality and that of being an Effect,-the two being naturally contradictory; for this reason the said Inference cannot be valid.-(c) The condition that the relation- ship should be infallible, permanent' precludes the Sadhāraṇa, Too Wide Probans; e.g., when the Eternality of Word-Sound is sought to be proved on the basis of its being cognisable, it is found that the relationship between Eternality and Cognisability' is not permanent, inasmuch as there are many things that are cognisable without being eternal; and hence the said relationship. cannot lead to a valid Inference of Eternality.-(d) The condition that one factor of the relationship (which is to be the Probans) must be perceived or well known in order to bring about the Inferential Cognition' precludes the Asiddha,' Impossible or Unknown Probans; e.g., when the fact of things like Merit and Demerit being perceptible to Buddha is sought to be proved on the ground of His Omniscience,-it is found that, inasmuch as this Omniscience has never been perceived or well known at all' it cannot lead to a valid Inference. 
C 
6 
< 
( 
" 
7 
" 
Apart from these Fallacies, the Prabhakara does not accept any other. For instance, he does not admit of the Neutralised Probans (Satparatipraksa '). His reason for this is that it is impossible for two contradictory characters to be predicated of the same Subject,' as is persupposed by the Fallacy of Neutrali- sation'; as under the circumstances, the two Inferences cannot be equally valid, as is implied by this fallacy; such contradictory 
C 
C 
104 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Inferences would be possible only when the real character of the Subject' would be unknown. (See Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 77.) 
( 
The Object of Inferential Cognition is of two kinds :- (1) Drṣṭasvalakṣaṇa, that of which the specific individuality or feature is perceived, and (2) the Adṛṣṭasvalaksana, that of which the said feature is not perceived. To the former category belong all such things as Fire and the like; and to the second category, such super-sensuous things as the Capacity' of things, the specific feature of which cannot be perceived, and yet it is possible. for us to cognise its permanent and infallible relationship to get at its Inferential Cognition. For instance, we cannot per- ceive the burning capacity of Fire, and yet we can infer its existence from noting its Effect produced upon things. (See Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 78.) 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
As to what is the Pramana and what the Resultant, in the case of Inference, the conclusion is the same as in the case of Perception. That is to say, if we regard Pramāņa as syno- nymous with Valid Cognition (Pramiti),—and hence 'Anumāna' as synonymous with Inferential Cognition,'-then what is Anumana,' Inference, is the Cognition of the Subject, Fire, proceeding from the Mind-Soul contact, as influenced by the perception of the Inferential Indicative (Smoke); and the Resultant in this case would consist of the acceptance or rejec- tion of the cognised object by the cognising Agent.-If, on the other hand, Pramana' is regarded as the Means by which valid cognition is obtained, and Anumana' as that by means of which the valid Inferential Cognition is obtained, then, in that case, the Anumāna-Pramāņa would be the Mind-Soul contact: and the relation between the several factors would form the 'Cognitive Process'; and the Resultant in this case would be the Inferential Cognition itself. If, lastly, the Means (of the Cog- nition) be taken as that which is the most effective (Sādhakatama) in the bringing about of the Result, then the Perception of the Inferential Indicative or Probans (e.g., Smoke) would have to be regarded as the Anumana-Pramana (Means of Inferential Cogni- tion); as it is this that is most directly and immediately effective in bringing about the Inferential Cognition (of Fire). Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 82.) 
(See 
CHAPTER XII: ANUMĀNA INFERENCE 
C 
C 
105 
There are two kinds of Inference-(1) Svartha,' for one's own benefit, and (2) Parartha,' for the benefit of others. Iu the former, the conclusion is deduced from the premiss or premisses recalled to the mind; in this case all the processes need not he stated; one often deduces a conclusion from a single premiss. In the second, the conclusion is deduced from premises which are generally fully stated. 
e.g., 
< 
Inference, it consists of 
As regards this Statement of the three Propositions, technically called Avayavas, Factors, of the Inferential Statement. These are (1) Statement of the Propo- sition, (2) the Statement of the Major Premiss-involving the Statement of the Corroborative Instance, and (3) the Statement of the Minor Premiss-involving the Statement of the Probans or Inferential Indicative.-(1) The Statement of the Proposition serves to point out what is intended to be proved by the Inference; 'Word-Sound is eternal;' it is only when this has been stated that we can intelligently proceed with the Inference.— (2) The Major Premiss states the Corroborative Instance and shows that there is an unfailing relationship between what is sought to be proved (the Probandum) (Eternality) and that by means of which it is sought to be proved (the Probans); and this relation-- ship must be indicated as existing in cases that are well known to both parties; for instance, when it is intended to prove the presence of Fire by means of the presence of Smoke, the Major Premiss is stated thus:- Wherever there is Smoke there is Fire, as in the Kitchen.' Instances that do not apply to the case in question are regarded as wrong Lastly, 
-Lastly, inasmuch as Inferential Cognition follows upon the Perception of one of the two factors between which the permanent relationship sub- sists, the perception of one factor becomes a necessary element in all Inferences; and it is as stating this, the presence of the one factor, that the Minor Premiss becomes essential. For instance, when seeking to prove the presence of Fire on the Hill by means of the presence of Smoke, it is necessary to make the statement that there is Smoke on the Hill;' without which the conclusion- that there is Fire on the Hill '--could not be rightly deduced. (Prakaraṇapañchika, p. 82.) 
- 
C 
C 
There is some difference of opinion regarding the precise order in which the Inferential Argument should state the two premisses. 
F. 14 
106 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
According to Prābhākara, there need to be no hard and fast rule regarding this order; because the conclusion- There is fire on the Hill follows all the same, whether we state the reasoning in the form-'(a) Wherever there is Smoke there is Fire, as in the Kitchen; and (b) there is Smoke on the Hill,'or in the form- (a) There is Smoke on the Hill, and (b) wherever there is Smoke there is Fire, as in the Kitchen.' (See Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 85.) 
or an 
Some writers have held that the purposes of the Corroborative Instance can be also served by the Negative Instance, Instance per contra: for in corroboration of the reasoning There is Fire because there is Smoke,' we may put forward the Instance 'Whenever there is no Fire, there is no Smoke, as in the Tank.'- This view is not accepted by the Prabhakara; because, he argues, the Probans can prove the conclusion only by force of its relation- ship to that which is sought to be proved; and this relationship can be asserted only by means of a positive instance, not by a negative one; even though in some cases, the Negative Instance may serve to point out the necessary relationship, yet it can do so only indirectly, the process thereby becoming more involved than in the case where the instance is stated in the positive form. Hence in all cases, it is the positive instance that should be put forward. (See Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 85), 
The defects pertaining to the 'Subject', Paksa, of the inferential Reasoning are of two kinds.--(a) being contrary to well-known facts of experience, and (b) having a qualification that is absolutely unknown. The defects pertaining to the Probans have already been indicated above under 'Fallacies'. Those pertaining to the Instance are of four kinds.-(1) being not applicable to what is sought to be proved, i.e., the Probandum: (2) being not applicable to the Probans: (3) being not applicable either to the Probans or to the Probandum; and (4) failing to establish the desired relation- ship. The defects pertaining to the Statement of the Proposition are (1) Indefiniteness and Obscurity of Expression and (2) Non- Affirmation. (Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 87.) 
(C) BHATTA VIEW OF INFERENCE. 
Shabara (Trs., p. 8) has declared that Inference (along with the other forms of Cognition) presupposes, and is based upon, 
CHAPTER XII: ANUMÂNA: INFERENCE 
107 
Perception. This has been objected to in Shlo. Va. Pratyakşa, 87-94; and explained in 95-96 et. seq. The objection emanates from the Buddhist, who holds the view that Perception is always Non-Conceptual' and as such, it cannot form the basis of Infer- ence or any other form of Cognition, as all these latter relate to the relationship of things, while no relationship can figure in Perception which is always Non-Conceptual. 
Kumārila's answer to this is that all that the Bhasya means is that the Inferential and other cognitive processes can proceed only after one or the other factors that figure therein have been previously perceived. 
To the stock objection that the Major Premiss already implies the Conclusion;-hence (in the words of J. S. Mill)- Every syllo- gism involves the fallacy of Petitio Principii,"-the answer given by the Bhatta is bolder than that given by Prabhakara, who, as we have seen, had to give up the idea that every valid cognition must apprehend something not already known.' The Bhāṭṭa accepts the permanent relationship between the Probandum (Fire) and Probans (Smoke), and yet holds to the view that Inferential Cognition, like every valid cognition, apprehends something that is not already known. He argues that, even though it is true that the Probans-Smoke-is seen, and also that the said percep- tion of Smoke carries with it the vague general idea of the Fire as a permanant concomitant of the Smoke,-yet the final Object apprehended by the resultant Inferential Cognition is, not one that is already known by other means of Cognition; because the said perception of Smoke, though implying the vague notion of Fire as its relative, does not imply the notion of the presence of the Fire in the mountain; and it is this qualified Fire that forms the object of the Inferential Cognition. Thus Inferential Cogni- tion also has to be regarded as 
as apprehending something not already known by other means. The vague notion of Fire in general is already there; but the Cognition of the Fire as related to a particular time and place,-the mountain for instance,-is not implied in the perception of Smoke. The smoke is seen,-the idea of Fire in general is also there, implied in the perception of Smoke, the perception of th mountain is also there; but there is no idea yet of the Fire as present in the Mountain, and it is this that forms the objective of the Inferential Cognition. (Shastra- dipika, pp. 41–44).108 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĂ IN ITS SOURCES 
C 
C 
When a man as got the Inferential Cognition through his knowledge of the permanent relationship between the Probans and the probandum,-he may wish to convey the same to another person; but for doing so, and for convincing him of the validity of his conclusion, he will have to state the Inferential reasoning in full; this Statement is called the Sadhana', proof', of the conclusion The Statement of the proof consists, according to the Bhatta, of three Statements: -(1) Statement of the Conclusion ('Word-Sound is transitory '), (2) Statement of the Probans or the Reason (Because it is an Effect '), (3) Statement of the Major Premiss along with Corroborative Instance (All Effects are transient, e.g., the Jar '). The order of these Statements is im- material; the reasoning may be stated as-(1) The Effects are transient-e.g., the Jar', (2) The Word-Sound is an Effect,' and (3) Therefore Word-Sound is transient.'-(Shastradipikā, p. 44.) 
" 
" 
The following are the defects in the Inferential Process:- 
(1) Defects of the Statement of the Conclusion-(a) Contrary to perceptible facts, (b) Unknown qualification and SO forth (See Shlo. Va., Anumāna). 
(2) Defects of the Probans-(a) Unknown, not admitted, In- admissable, (b) Fallible, Inconclusive, (c) Contradictory. (a) The Unknown or the Inadmissible is of five kinds :-(1) Inadmissible by itself, (2) Inadmissible in Qualification, (3) Inadmissible. Negation, (4) Inadmissible Spbstratum, (5) Inadmissible Con- comitance. (b) The Inconclusive is of two kinds-(1) Fallible, Untrue, and (2) Neutralised. In the case of the Neutralised Probans, the two contradictory reasons are not equally valid; what is meant is that the parties are unable to notice any differ- ence in their comparative validity. The Too-Wide Probans also is defective; so also is the Too-Narrow Probans.-(c) The Contradictory Probans is what is concomitant with the contrary of the Probandum. 
The Corroborative Instance is of two kinds :-Instance of Similarity and Instance of Dissimilarity. An example of the former we have in the Kitchen-whic provides an instance of the concomitance of Smoke with Fire; an example of the Instance of Dissimilarity we have in the Tank, which provides an instance of the concomitance of No-Fire and No-Smoke. But it is seldom 
CHAPTER XII: ANUMĀNA: INFERENCE 
109 
necessary to state the second kind of Instance. (Shastradīpikā, p. 45.) 
What is meant by the Bhasya declaring that there are two kinds of Inference is only that there are Inferences pertaining to Particulars as well as to Universals. (Shastradīpikā, p. 50.) 
CHAPTER XIII 
L 
VERBAL COGNITION: SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
(A) SHABARA-Bhāṣya 
'Shastra', Scriptural Injunction ', is that means of cognis ing super-sensuous things (ie., Dharma and Adharma) which proceeds from Verbal Cognition-(Bhāṣya Trs., p. 15.) 
C 
" 
The Bhasya does not think it necessary to provide a definition of Word or Verbal Cognition in general; it defines only the particular form of Word, Injunction, which is what bears upon the subject-matter of Mimämsä, viz., Dharma-Adharma. Hence 
C 
the term Shabda here stands for the Vedic or Scriptural Word, and Artha' for Dharma-Adharma, which forms the subject-matter of Scripture -says Kumarila. (Shlo. Vārtika, Shabda, 8—13.) According to Prabhakara (Bṛhati, p. 104) also, the term 'Shastra (in the Definition) stands for Injunction; and the term Shabdavijñāna' stands for the Cognition of something to be done, derived through Word. Hence Shastra,' Injunction, is the means of cognising what should be done, through Words. (Su. 1.1.5, Bhāṣya-Trs., p. 9.) 
< 
In course of discussion, the general question relating to Verbal Cognition in general and its validity and reliability, also comes in for full treatment. (Shabara-Bhāṣya Trs.. pp. 16-25) as below. 
The validity and reliability of the cognition derived from Scriptural Injunction is assailed on the ground of the Veda (Scripture) being full of absurd and incoherent assertions: which fact vitiates its validity as a guide to the right knowledge of Dharma. (Shabara-Bhasya, pp. 16-17.) 
( 
The answer to this is provided in Su. 5.-The relation of the Word with its denotation is inborn; Injunction is the means of knowing Dharma,-and it is infallible in regard to all that is imperceptible; it is a valid means of knowledge, as it is indepen- dent. That is, (a) the relation between the Word and its Denota- tion is inseparable; (b) it becomes the means of knowing Dharma, which is not cognisable by any other Means of Cognition;—(c) it is 
110 
CHAPTER XIII SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
111 
Word in the form of Injunction that provides this knowledge;- (d) this means of knowing Dharma is infallible; (e) hence it is a valid means of knowledge; as it is independent. That is, when a cognition has been brought about by the said Word, there is no need for any other corroborating Cognition or Person. (Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 8-9.) 
What is meant by the relation between the Word and its Denotation being inborn' is that it does not owe its origin to any person, it is primordial, original, self-sufficient, not depen- dent upon any other Means of Cognition. (Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 17.) 
If the connection between the Word and its Denotation were dependent upon other Means of Cognition, then all those Words and Expressions which speak of super-sensuous things might be regarded as of doubtful validity; when however the said connee- tion is inborn, inherent, self-sufficient, then there is nothing to shake the inherent validity of what is learnt from the words of the Veda. (Brihatī-Rijuvimalā.) 
Thus then the knowledge provided by the Scriptural Injune- tion must be right and reliable. In the case of Words emanating from human sources, there may be doubts regarding their validity or truth; as in this case it would all be dependent for its validity upon things extraneous to themselves,-such as the validity of those sources from which the speaker may have derived his know- ledge of what he is speaking of and so forth. On the other hand, in the case of the Word not emanating from a human source,--- why should there be any doubt regarding its truth? Certainly, we do not require any corroboration of what we learn from the said Word; when the Word speaks of something, what is meant is that it makes that thing known, i.e., it becomes the means of that thing becoming known; so that as soon as the Means, in the shape of the Word, is there, what is expressed by it becomes known by itself, without any extraneous help. Under the circumstances, how could one call it "false"? As a matter of fact, the notion derived from an Injunction is not of a doubtful character; nor does there appear any notion to the contrary at any other time or place, or under any other circumstances. (Shabara-Trs., pp. 17- 18.) 
This leads on to the general question of Words and their Denotation. It is argued that all that has been said above may 
112 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
be true; but there can be no relationship between the Word and what is denoted by it; none of the several kinds of Relationship- Conjunction, Inherence, Cause-Effect, Container-contained-is 
possible between the Word and what it denotes. 
The answer to the above is that the Relationship between the Word and what it denotes is that of the Denoter-Denoted, i.e., of the Name and the Named.-This is objected to on the ground that no such Relationship is cognised when one hears a Word uttered for the first time.-The answer to this is that in all such things. our experience is the only guide. It is only when we find a Word 
actually expressing a certain thing that we regard it as the Denoter of that thing; this is not found possible in the case of a Word heard for the first time; in fact, the denotation of a Word is understood only when it has been heard used as many times as makes it definitely recognised that this Word denotes this thing. Says the opponent-" If the Word does not express any meaning when it is heard for the first time, then the relation between the Word and its Denotation cannot be inborn, it must be something created, artificial." (Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 18.) The answer to this is that the said relation cannot be artificial; it can- not be regarded as created by any person-not even by God. No such creator of Word-relationship can be vouched for by any Means of Cognition. 
C 
The Bhasya (Trs., p. 19) takes up the three questions-(1) What is a Word? (2) What is its Denotation? and (3) Wat is the relation between the Word and its Denotation? 
I. What is a Word? The Word is a verbal unit composed of a number of letters. For instance, in the case of the word Gauḥ' (as denoting the Cow), the Word is the unit composed of the component letters g, au and h. Such is the declaration of the revered Upavarsa. Among people the term Word' is ap- plied to what is apprehended by the Ear; and in the case of the Word gauḥ' what is apprehended by the Ear is the unit com- posed of the said letters (p. 19). 
C 
( 
The Bhāṣya brings forward, in this connection, the view of the Grammarian regarding the nature of the Word.' 
Word.' The Grammarian holds what has been called the Doctrine of the Sphota.' He argues as follows (against the view propounded by Upavarṣa):-" If it is as declared by Upavarṣa, then there can 
CHAPTER XIII: SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
113 
be no cognition of the meaning of a word. Because, as a matter of fact, the cognition of what the Word denotes does not appear on the hearing of the component letters, directly; and apart from the component letters, there is no single entity in the shape of the composite whole (under the above theory), from which the cognition of the Denotation could follow. For instance, at the moment that we hear the letter 'ga,' we do not hear the letter 'au', and so forth. From all this it follows that the word gauḥ' as a composite unit, must be something different from the component letters; and it is from this composite unit that the cognition of the Denotation follows [and to this composite unit we give the name Sphoṭa]." 
Shabara's answer to this is as follows:-What happens is that each component letter, as it is uttered, leaves an impression be- hind, and what brings about the cognition of the Denotation of the Word is the last component letter along with the Impressions of each of the preceeding component letters. In actual experi- ence, the composite Word-unit is never found to be anything entirely different from the component letters; hence there can be no Word' apart from the component letters.-This is a much simpler hypothesis than that of the Grammarian who has to postulate a 'Sphota 
as entirely distinct from the component letters; while our doctrine requires no such postulate. (Shabara, Trs., pp. 19-20.) 
C 
C 
C 
C 
II. What is it that is denoted by the Word? What is denoted by the Word- Cow,' for instance, is the Universal' (Class or Community) Cow-marked by certain characteristic features the dewlap, for instance. This Universal is an accom- plished entity and is actually perceived as such. (Shabara, Trs., pp. 21-22.) 
C 
That it is the Universal' that is denoted by the Word has been declared by Jaimini himself under 1.3.33; and Shabara's comments on this Sutra are found under Adhikarana 10 B of Adhyaya I, Pada 3-Sutras 30 to 35. (Trs., pp. 118-124.) 
" 
Under this Adhikarana, the question is pointedly raised-Is it the Universal' or the Individual' that is denoted by the Word? That factor which is common to several particular things is the Class or Universal; while that which possesses certain speci- fic uncommon characteristics is the Individual. The question as 
F. 15 
114 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
4 
to which of these two is denoted by the Word- Cow' for in- stance arises from the fact that whenever the Word cow' is pronounced in common parlance, it brings about the idea of the Universal-the class-character-common to all cows,--and yet in all actions resulting from the use of the Word, it is the individual cow that comes in. 
C 
C 
C 
" 
The Individual-Theory has been thus set forth (in S. 30 and Bhāṣya):-" (A) If Words denoted Universals or Classes, no Injunctions of Action would be possible; i.e., if Words denoted 'Universals,' there could be no injunction of actions like killing, washing, chopping and so forth, as none of these actions could be done to any Universal.' 
Universal.' As regards the notion of Class or Universal that appears on the utterance of the Word, the right view is that the Universal' figures only as the distinguishing feature of the Individual denoted by the Word,-the idea being that of that particular animal which has the class-character Cow'; just as when the word Lancer is uttered, though the resultant idea is that of the man with the Lance, yet the Lance is not what is denoted by the Word, it comes only as the charac- terising feature of the man.-(B) Another argument favouring the Individual-Theory is that, if the Word denoted ‘Universals', then there would be no words expressive of qualities as subsisting in Substances. (Su. 31); that is, if Words denoted the Uni- versal, there would be no Word expressive of qualities, such as we have in the expression Sir cows are to be given as the Sacri- ficial Fee '-(C) The third argument (Su. 32) is that we meet with such Vedic texts as If the animal consecrated has run away, one should secure another animal of the same colour and of the same age; if words denoted the Universal' then there could be no securing of another animal': as the other animal also would belong to the same Universal' as the one that has run away. From all this it follows that what is denoted by the Word is the Individual." 
( 
C 
" 
C 
C 
4 
The Siddhanta view is that it is the Class, the Universal, that is denoted, as it is that which serves the purpose of Actions. (Su. 33). For instance, we have the Injunction One should erect the Altar like the Shyena '; such an injunction would have sense only if the word Shyena' denoted the Universal' 
Universal' If it 
If it de- noted an individual Shyēna-bird, then, inasmuch as it would be impossible for the performer to make or produce any such indivi- 
< 
CHAPTER XIII SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
115 
dual bird, the Injunction would be laying down something im- possible and hence meaningless and futile. The word therefore must stand for the Class, the Universal, the factor common to all individuals, and as such representable and producible in the shape of the figure of the Bird... If the Word denoted any one In- dividual, then it could not be used for any other Individual. and if the Word 'Cow' could be used for other Individual cows also, then why could it not be used for other Individual animals- Horses, Asses, etc.?... If again, a Word were to denote that Individual alone to which it has been actually applied in usage, then the Word 'cow' could not be used in reference to the new- born calf. Nor, in this case, would it be possible to have any such comprehensive idea of the Cow as is met with in such expressions as-this is a cow, that is a cow.' As a matter of fact, too, no Word is ever found to be applied to any one Individual only, and not to another. It may be held that "the word Cow is applied to and denotes all those Individuals wherein the common class- character Cowness -subsists." If that were so, then what would be cognised as denoted by the Word would be a qualified Individual, i.e., the Individual qualified by the Universal Cow' ;-- in that case the qualifying factor-the Universal Cow '--should be one that has been already cognised before.-It may be held that " the Word may be taken as denoting the Universal as the qualifying factor and the Individual as the qualified factor; and in any particular case, which of these two is the primary and which the secondary will be determined by the intention of the Speaker."This however cannot be so; such determination of the Primary or the Secondary character would be possible or neces- sary only if both, Universal as well as Individual, were denoted by the Word; as a matter of fact, however, by positive and negative concommitance we know that what is invariably expressed by the Word is the Universal, not the Individual, the idea of which latter only follows upon the wake of the notion of the Universal.--Nor can the Word be taken as denoting the Universal as qualified by the Individual; as, if that were so, then the Word denoting the Universal as qualified by any one Individual, could not be applied to any other Individual. From all this it follows that it is the Universal that is denoted by the Word, and it is this Cognition of the Universal or Class that brings about the notion of the Individual subsequently. 
116 
PŪRVAA-MĪMĀMSĂ IN ITS SOURCES 
(C 
[Sú. 34, Bhā., Trs., P., 123] It has been argued by the Indi- vidualist that (1) "no action would be possible, if the Word denoted the Universal." (Su. 30)-and (2) that there would be no Word expressive of Qualities subsisting in Substances (Sü. 31), and (3) "that there could be no Injunction of another, such as we have in the text another animal should be brought in.' (Sū. 32.) 
C 
J 
The answer to all this is that-As Words denote Universals or classes, and through these, also Individuals, there would be no dissociation from Action, etc. (Su. 35.) That is, (a) inasmuch as the Word denotes the Universal, the Action enjoined would pertain to that Individual which is related to that Universal. For instance, in the case of the Injunction Sprinkle water on the Vrihi-Corn,'-what is enjoined is the sprinkling of water over paddy-over that Substance which is helpful in the sacrificial performance; as the sprinkling could not be enjoined as to be done over the Universal' because no sprinkling over a Universal is possible; so what happens in this case is that the word' Vrihi- Corn', which really denotes the Universal,' is used for the pur- pose of qualifying and indicating the receptacle of the action of sprinkling water; so that the Universal', when cognised as denoted by the Word, would qualify that receptacle of the action. Thus there would be no incongruity at all. (b) Similarly as regards Words expressive of qualities-in the case of the text speaking of Six Cows,' what is intended to be declared is the number of that substance which is to be given as the Fee, and the word cows,' as denoting the Universal,' serves to qualify and indicate that Substance. (c) As regards the Injunction re- garding another animal', what is meant to be spoken of as another' is the substitute for what has been lost; and hence the word animal', which denotes the Universal,' serves to qualify and indicate the real substitute. 
C 
( 
( 
Thus it is established that all Words like Cow' 
( 
'Horse' 
and 
80 forth denote Classes or Universals. (Shabara, Trs., p. 124.) 
III. The third questoin is-What is the relation between the Word and its Denotation? 
The relation between the Word and its Denotation is that- on the Word being cognised, what is denoted by it becomes cog- 
CHAPTER XIII: SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
117 
nised. That is, the relation is that of the Name and the Named. (Shabara, Trs., p. 22.) 
All these three-(1) the Word, (2) its Denotation, i.e., the Universal, and (3) the relation between these,-are eternal. That the Universal' (or Class) is eternal has been shown above 
(Section on Jati). 
The relation between the Word and its Denotation is also eternal. It cannot be regarded as brought about by any Person (in the shape of God); as there is no proof of the existence of such a Person. Words are always taught as accomplished entities having the inherent power of denoting things. If it were impos- sible for us to comprehend the meaning of words without presum- ing a Creator of this relationship, then alone could there be justification for presuming such a Creator. As a matter of fact, however, we find that when older people are making use of words for their own purposes, the younger men who happen to hear those words actually come to understand them; those older people too, when they were young, understood the words in the same way, when uttered by their Elders; those later again under- stood them as used by still older people; and so on the process has gone on without beginning in time.-The other explanation pro- vided by the other party is in the shape of the doctrine that the meaning is comprehended because the relation between that Meaning and the Word was created, laid down, by some Person. As between these two explanations, so long as the explanation based upon common usage is available, it cannot be right to pre- sume a Creator of the relation. (Shabara, Trs., p. 24.) 
This relationship is infallible also; it is always found to be true. There is no point of time when the Word-relation was not there. (P. 24). Then again, in regard to such super-sensuous things as the Deity and the like, the creating of a Name would be not only useless, but also impossible. When a thing is known in its general form, and its particular forms are not known,-then alone is the Name propounded in connection with these particular forms; and in the case of such words as Deity' and the like, no general or particular forms can be perceived. For this reason also there can be no creation of the relation in question by any Person. (Shabara, Trs., pp. 24-25.)118 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
It has been shown that what is denoted by the Word is the 'Universal,' and this is eternal;-also that the relationship between the Word and what is denoted by it is eternal. As a necessary corollary to these, it follows that the Word itself is eternal. This has been dealt with in detail under Sutras I. i. 6 to 23. (Shabara, Trs., pp. 32-41.) 
The opposite view has been set forth under Su. 6-11; it is as follows:-"It has been asserted that the relation between the Word and its Denotation is eternal. But this is not possible; because the Word itself is not eternal. 
As a 
matter of fact, Word is often found to be destroyed, so that when it comes to be produced (uttered) again, its relation to its Denotation cannot but be artificial, ephemeral, newly made. Then again, no one ever comprehends the meaning of a Word heard for the first time. -The Word itself must be something ephemeral, (a) because it is always found to follow after an Effort; finding that there is an invariable concommitance between the appearance of the Word and Human Effort,--the Word appearing only when there is Human Effort, we infer that the Word is produced by the Effort; nor is there anything to show that the Word existed before that Effort. (S. 6).-(b) 
(Sū. 6).—(b) Another reason why the Word should be regarded as ephemeral is that it does not persist. (Su. 7); that is, when the Word is uttered, it is not found to persist even for one moment; it is not perceived at all; from which we conclude that it must have been destroyed.-(c) Another reason: -Because the term Karoti', 
Karoti', makes', produces', is heard in connection with words. (Su. 8). In common parlance people make use of such expressions as Kuru shabdam' (make the word- sound), which shows that the Word is something made, produced.- (d) Another reason:-We hear the same Word uttered in several places at the same time; this would not be possible if the Word were one and eternal. Unless there is something very special about it, there can be no plurality in what is eternal; it is only in the case of non-eternal products, which are many, that, on their being produced in several places, they become connected with the several points in space. (Sū. 9)-(e) Another reason for re- garding Word as non-eternal:-Because there are original forms and their Modifications (Su. 10). In the case of such expressions as dadhyatra', the original form was dadhi-atra', and the i' of dadhi' because modified into y'; such is the teaching of the 
C 
C 
C 
& 
CHAPTER XIII: SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
119 
Grammarians; and as a rule whatever is liable to Modification is not eternal. (Sū. 10).-(f) Another reason:-There is an Aug- mentation of the Word-Sound due to the multiplicity of its producers (speakers) (S. 11). As a matter of fact, we find that when a Word is pronounced by several persons, the Word-Sound produced is very loud. If the Word were only manifested, and not produced, then the Word-Sound heard would always be the same, whether pronounced by one or by many persons. From this we conclude that some portion of the Word is produced by each of the speakers, and it is on account of the consequent augmenta- tion of the sound that it is perceived as louder. (S. 11.)" 
Shabara's answer to the above is as follows:-As regards the reason (a) that "Word is found to appear after human Effort", --if we can establish, by sound reasoning, that Word is eternal, then the fact put forward admits of the explanation that what is brought about by the Effort is only the manifestation of the already- existing Word. (Sū. 12.) When the Word ceases to be heard, what happens is that there is no perception of the Word which is still there,-on account of the non-reaching (non-contact) of the perceptive agency; and it is not due to the Destruction of the Word. If we can establish the fact of Word being eternal, the phenomena brought forward can be explained on the ground that of the causes that bring about the perception of the Word-Sound, there are some which are not operative when we do not hear it. The said perception of the Word-Sound is brought about by certain Conjunctions and Disjunctions which serve to manifest, not produce, the Word-Sound. What happens is that the Air-particles disturbed by the Sound-provoking stroke strike against the surrounding stagnant Air-particles, and produce certain Conjunctions and Disjunctions (in the shape of waves) on all sides, which go on spreading as long and as far as the momentum lasts; these Conjunctions and Disjunctions-Air- Waves-are not perceived because Air is imperceptible, in- visible; and as for the Word-Sound, it is heard only 80 long and so far as the waves do not cease, and after these have ceased, it is not heard. It is for this same reason that Sound is heard at a greater distance when the Wind is favourable. (Sū. 13.)-() As regards the next argument-based upon the use of the word Karoti 'makes' in relation to the Word-Sound (urged in Su. 8), the answer to this is that when Word has been 
" 
120 
PURVA-MIMÄMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
" 
, 
definitely proved to be eternal, the expression 'Karoti' is to be explained as meaning making use of.' (S. 14).—(c) As re- gards the next argument (urged in Su. 9)-that the Word is heard simultaneously in several places; the answer is that what is urged is not right. The Sun, though one, is actually seen at the same time in several places. When the form of the Word is one only, if there are several places where the Word is heard, the diversity lies in the places, not in the Word. (d) As regards the 'Modification' urged in Su. 10, the case of the expression dadhyatra' is not one of Modification of the original letter 'i'; in fact the resultanty is a letter totally different from the original 'i'. That there is no Modification in this case is proved by the fact that people going to use the letter 'y' do not take up the letter '2',-in the way in which one going to make curds takes up milk, of which the curd is a Modification. Merely because we perceive some sort of a similarity between the two letters' and ' 
i' and 'y' we cannot regard one as the Modi- fication of the other.-(f) As regards the "Augmentation (urged in Sū. 11)),-what has been urged is not quite accurate; as a matter of fact the Word-Sound has no parts,-no such parts are perceived; and being without parts, it cannot under- go Augmentation. What happens in the case urged is that when the Word is uttered by one man, its sound is soft, but when it is pronounced by many men, those letters which had sounded soft come to be heard as loud, on account of having been taken up by several Conjunctions and Disjunctions due to the utterances. Hence the Augmentation' spoken of is of the Voise, not of the Word. (Su. 17). From all this we are led to the final conclusion that Word is eternal, as its utterance is for the purpose of another (Sū. 18),—i.e., for the purpose of making the meaning known to another person. If the Word ceased to exist as soon as uttered, then no one could speak of anything to another person. On the other hand, if the Word does not cease, but continues to exist, then it is only right and natural that when the Word is uttered and heard repeatedly, its meaning becomes comprehended by other persons; specially as it would not be possible to establish the neces- sary relationship between each succeeding Word and its Denota- tion. (See above). If then, the Cognition of the meaning of the succeeding Word were based merely upon its similarity to a pre- vious Denotative Word, then there would always be a chance of 
C 
CHAPTER XIII: SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
121 
as 
its being mistaken and hence liable to sublation. Further, each time that the word cow' is heard, if it were only a different Word, only similar to the original Denotative Word, then this would mean that whenever the Word is uttered it produces two things (1) the use of the new Word and (2) the connection of this new Word with the Denotation; this cannot be right. (S. 18). As a matter of fact, whenever the word cow is pronounced, the idea that it produces is that of all cows simultaneously; this shows that the Word must denote the entire Class or Universal 'Cow'; and it is not possible to create the relation of the Word to a Universal,' because in creating a relation, the creator would have to lay down the relation by pointing to the Universal, and without actually using the word 'Cow',-which he could not use until he had created its relation to the Denotation-in what manner could one indicate the distinet Universal 
Universal' denoted by the Word? Specially as the Body of the Cow, which alone could be pointed out, is the substratum of several Universals' -such as Earth, Substance, etc. If however, the word Cow is eternal, it is the same Word that is uttered several times, and has been previously heard several times, applied to other individual cows; thus by a process of positive and negative concommitance, the Word comes to be recognised as denoting the particular Universal. For this reason also, the Word must be eternal. (S. 
eternal. (S. 19).-Then again, when people speak of a number in connection with a Word, what they mean is that the Word is pronounced so many times; they never mean that the Word itself is so many in number; and the use of such expressions shows that people recognise the same Word; their process of reasoning is as follows;-"We recognise the Word to be the same, our Cognition and our Cognitive organs -are not defective,-other people also recognise the Word to be the same; nor can this idea be called a Delusion; it could be so recoguised only if the difference among the words were actually preceived; as a matter of fact however, the idea that there are so many different words is not vouched for by any Means of Right Cognition; we do not however accept mere Recognisability of the Word as proof of its eternality; all that we mean by citing the fact of Recognition is to show that the theory of the non-eternality of the Word is contrary to a fact of Perception, in the form of Recognition; and we do not mean that eternality is inferred from, 
F. 16 
122 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
For the 
proved by, Recognition. It may be that the non-eternality also of the Word is supported by an Inference only, while Eternality will have the support of Inference in addition to Perception in the form of Recognition. It may be argued that the word 'cow' that was pronounced yesterday has ceased to exist, so that what is heard today must be a different word. But the Word that was pronounced yesterday has not ceased to exist; for the simple reason that we perceive (hear) it again; when people see an object, and after ceasing to see it for a while, see it again, they recognise it to be the same, and they never think that the previous object had ceased to exist and a new one had come into existence. A thing can be regarded as having ceased to exist, as being non- existent only when it is not cognisable by any Means of Cogni- tion. In the case in question however the Word 
Word is actually cognised, perceived, through Recognition, as the same. non-existence of the Word on the other hand, there is no proof at all. Hence the idea of the Continuous Eristence of the Word cannot be wrong, it must be right. From this it also follows that even in the case of a Word not pronounced and heard, if people do not actually perceive it, they cannot assume that it is non- existent; just as, when a man, going out of the house. does not perceive all his family-members, he does not assume that they have ceased to exist, are non-existent. The Eternality of Word is not affected by the doctrine of Universal Flux; because, in regard to other things, that view has the support of the fact that the things are actually found to be perishing, while in the case of the Word, no such perishing is perceived, and it is never found to have perished or ceased to exist. From all this it follows that Word is Eternal. (S. 20.) Even in the case of things whose actual production has not been perceived, some are regard- ed as non-eternal, perishable, when it is found that there are potent causes leading to their destruction. For instance, even though one may not have seen the Cloth being produced by the process of weaving, yet seeing that it has been brought about by the conglomeration of the yarns, he concludes that it must perish, become non-existent, when that conglomeration comes to an end, or when the yarns themselves are destroyed. In the case of the Word, there is no such cause or circumstance that could be regard- ed as bringing about its destruction and non-existence. (Sú. 21.) The view" that the Word is a product of the Air, and hence 
CHAPTER XIII: SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
123 
perishable " is not tenable; if the Word were the product of Air, then it could only be Air in a particular shape: as a matter of fact, however, we do not recognise a single particle of Air in the com- position of the Word, in the manner in which we recognise the parts of Yarn in the composition of the Cloth. Then again, if the Word were an air-product, it would be perceptible through the organ of Touch; as a matter of fact, however, the Word is not Touched; hence it cannot be a product of Air. It must be Eternal. (Sū. 22)-There are Vedic texts also which speak of the Word as Eternal. From all this we conclude that the Word is eternal. (Sū. 23.) 
• 
THE SENTENCE AND ITS MEANING 
SHABARA-BHĀṢYA (TRS., pp. 42—47) 
It has been established that Words, their Meanings and the Relation between Words and their Meanings, are all Eternal. But so far nothing has been said regarding Sentences. And as the Vedic Injunction, which is the sole means of knowing Dharma, is always in the form of a Sentence,-until the same facts have. been established in regard to Sentences, the validity of the Injunc- tion as a means of knowing Dharma remains doubtful. Hence it is that all writers on Mimämsä have devoted their attention to the Sentence and its Meaning. 
Sutra 24 sets forth the arguments in support of the view that Eternality cannot belong to the Sentence or its Meaning, or to the Relation between the two. The Sentence is a group of words; cach Word has its own Denotation; and even though each indivi- dual Word and its Denotation is eternal, the Sentence or its Meaning cannot be eternal. 
The Mimamsaka's own view is set forth under Su. 25:-In the Sentence, there is only a mention of words with definite Deno- tations along with a Word denoting Action, and the meaning of the Sentence is based upon that.-On this the Bhasya proceeds (Trs., p. 44):-In the Sentence, we have a few words that are tied down to their respective Denotations, along with a word denoting Action. Hence the Sentence cannot have any separate meaning, entirely apart from the meanings of words composing it. In fact, there is no valid means of knowledge whereby we could have 
124 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
a Cognition of the independent meaning of the Sentence. Even the last letter of the Sentence, along with the Impressions left by the preceding letters, has no power, independently of the meaning of the words, to express any meaning totally different from what is expressed by the words. In the case of the Sentence, what happens is that each of the words composing it ceases from activity after having expressed its own meaning, and the meanings of words thus comprehended bring about the comprehension of the meaning of, the Sentence as a whole. What is brought about by the meaning of a word is the notion of a qualified thing--the white object, the black object and so forth; and as what is expressed by the Sentence is only a qualiffed thing,-riz., the meanings of words as qualified by one another, it follows that the comprehension of the meaning of the Sentence is derived from the meanings of the Words; and no separate power of expression need be postulated for the Sentence as a whole. Then again, whether a certain thing is different or not-different from another is always ascertained through positive and negative concomitance; and in the case in question it is found that sometimes, by reason of some mental derangement,-as loss of memory-the meanings of the Words uttered are not compre- hended; at such a time the meaning of the Sentence composed of those Words would never be comprehended,-only if the mean- ing of the Sentence were not different from that of the Words; and as matter of fact, the meaning of the Sentence is never com- prehended in such cases. It follows, therefore, that the mean- ing of the Sentence is not entirely different from that of the Words. From all this it follows that the meaning of the Sentence is comprehended only on the comprehension of the mean- ings of the component Words; and it has no connection with, and does not follow from, a distinct unit in the shape of the Group of Words (Sentence, conceived as something distinct from Words). It is true that the direct Denotation of each word,-which con- sists of the Universal-becomes somewhat restricted in its scope when the Word appears in a Sentence; it is for that reason that we regard the Meaning of the Sentence as consistig in a qualified Denotation of the component Words; but only when we find that the meaning of the Word as used by itself serves no useful pur- Our idea is that if it can serve no useful purpose in its isolated form, it may serve some purpose by being taken as a 
pose. 
CHAPTER XIII: SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
125 
qualified idea expressed by the Sentence. Further, the Accusative and other Endings appearing at the end of Words clearly indi- cate the rule that the Denotation of the Words qualifies and res- tricts the signification of those Endings; so that the general rule --that the Accusative Ending signifies the objective character of things.-e.g., the idea of the cow as denoted by the term Gam' with the Accusative Ending, becomes set aside by the special rule that the Accusative Ending at the end of the particular word ‘go' (Cow) denotes, not objectivity in general, but the objectivity of the Cow; that is, the objective character as restricted, and qualified by, the Cow. 
Then there is the argument that Sentences, as Groups of Words, are composed by human beings, and hence cannot be Eternal, like the Word. This may be true in regard to Sentences composed by human beings; it cannot be true regarding Sentences in the Veda; and it is the latter that the Mimamsaka cares for; indeed according to him, it is only the Fedic Sentence-which is entirely free from defects-that can be valid by itself and hence a reliable means or source of knowledge-specially that relating to Super-sensuous things. In regard to the ordinary things of the world, it is possible for Sentences to be composed in actual usage (Sū. 26)—-by men, after they have actually perceived the things spoken of in those Sentences. The conclusion thus is that the comprehension of the Meaning of the Sentence is obtained from that of the Meanings of the component Words. (Shabara- Bha., Trs., pp. 42-47.) 
From what has been said under S. 25-to the effect that the Sentence contains only the mention of Words with definite Deno- tations along with a Word denoting action,-and from what the Bhāṣya says on that Sutra,-it is clear that these old authorities lend tacit support to the Prabhakara view of Verbal Expression, the implication of which is that it is only the Injunction of an action that is really expressive and hence valid. (See below, under Prabhakara.) 
( 
The same support is also lent by S. 1.1.32 and the Bhasya thereon (Trs., p. 50)-where we read-On account of passages being related to Actions etc. (Su. 32); on which the Bhasya- The Sen- tences occuring in the Veda are laid down as mutually related, and they always collectively bear upon an Action.' (Trs., p. 50.) 
123 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
VEDA NOT THE WORK OF A PERSONAL BEING 
(Shabara, Sú. 27 to 32, Trs., pp. 48-50) 
The Mimamsaka's main thesis is that Dharma can be known only from the Vedic Injunction; and in order to establish the in- fallibility and utter reliability of the Vedic Injunction, he has had to prove that-(1) Words are Eternal, (2) the Denotations of Words are Eternal, (3) the Relationship between Words and their Denotations is Eternal, (4) the meaning of the Sentence is com- prehended only on the comprehension of the meanings of the com- ponent Words, and the Sentence has no meaning apart by itself. As regards the Eternality of the Sentence, however, that Eter- nality cannot belong to the Sentence composed by human beings, and as such it cannot be Eternal; and for the same reason it can- not have an inherent validity, as it is open to the suspicion of having been vitiated at its source by the defects of the man pro- nouncing the Sentence. But this does not perturb the Mimam- saka; as the only Sentence upon whose eternality and validity he is keen is the Vedic Injunction, which alone is the valid source of our knowledge of Dharma. And as all human or personal asso- ciations are open to the suspicion of being vitiated at its source, it becomes necessary for the Mimamsaka to show that the Vedic Sentence is not the work of any person,that the Veda is not the work of any author,-that it is Eternal, self-sufficient. 
66 
The opposite position has been thus set forth in Su. 1.1.27- 28: The Veda is the work of a personal author; it belongs to recent times; this is shown by the following facts;-(1) Sections of the Veda are named after human beings such as 'Kathaka' 'Kalapaka and the like; Katha and Kalapa are well-known names of certain sages; such naming of the Vedic sections, therefore, could not be possible except on the basis of the assumption that these persons are the authors of the sections named after them; (2) in the Veda we find the mention of such ephemeral things and names of men, etc.-as Babara, the son of Pravahana and so forth." (Shabara-Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 48-49.) 
The Mimamsaka's answer to the above is as follows:-We have already explained above (under Sü. 5,-Bhā., Trs., p. 17) that there is an unbroken tradition of the Vedic text among Vedic Scholars of which no beginnings can be traced. This proves that 
CHAPTER XIII: SCRIPTURAL INJUNCTION 
127 
the Vedic text, the Vedic Injunction, is Eternal. The names 'Kathaka' and the like are due to the fact of the particular person having been a specially efficient teacher of that section of the Veda. As for the words that appear to be proper names and met with in the Veda, these are not the names of any persons at all; they are common words, not names, and it is only a chance coincidence that they resemble some proper names of modern 
times. 
As for certain sentences in the Veda that appear to be in- coherent and meaningless, which might discredit the reliability of the Veda, it is not right to take any Vedic text out of its con- text, and treat it as an isolated assertion. The sentences have to be taken as correlated to, and collectively bearing upon, some action which is enjoined as to be done. Thus interpreted, no sentence in the Veda can be found to be meaningless or incoherent. (Bha., Tr., pp. 49-50.)CHAPTER XIV 
(B) SCRIPTURAL OR VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA 
( 
4 
[Prakaraṇa-Pañchikā, p. 87 et saq.] The 'Shastra'—Scrip- tural or Verbal Cognition-has been defined as the cognition of something not before the Eyes, brought about by the knowledge of words. Verbal Cognition therefore is that Cognition of things imperceptible-i.e., not cognised by other Means of Cognition- which proceeds from Mind-Soul contact aided by the knowledge of Sounds'; the Sounds' meant here being those in the form of letters; as these alone are audible by the ear; all sounds heard are in the shape of letters, there being no such thing as mere Dhrani, Indistinct Sound. The Sound therefore that is spoken of in this connection is only a composite of Letter-Sounds related to something (which forms its Denotation); such indis- tinet Sounds as those of the crowing of birds is not really what is heard.--(Bṛhati, p. 155); in every case the Sound that is heard is in the form of Letter-Sounds; in the case of Words there are as many units of Perception, i.e., Audition, as there are letters com- posing them; and the idea that we have of having heard one Word is due to the close proximity and quickness in which the several Letter-Sounds are heard. This idea of the Word however has to be regarded as a Unit, as it is only thus that it could have a single Denotation. 
( 
C 
" 
The comprehension of this Denotation of Words is not got at through the Sense-organs; because the Sense-organ brings about the perception of only the Letter-Sounds. In the Letters them- selves, however, there is a certain potency which brings about the apprehension of the Denotation of the Word composed of those Letters. It is for this reason that Letters have been held to be the Means of Verbal Cognition. The Word is nothing more than the Letters-ga and the rest,-and it is this that is spoken of as Shabda, Word, and there is nothing apart from the Letters' says the Brhati (p. 63).—But the Word alone, as composed of the Letter-Sounds, is not sufficient to bring about the comprehen- sion of the meaning; it is only the Sentence composed of such words that brings about the Cognition; and what is eternal too is 
128 
CHAPTER XIV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA 129 
only the relation of the Sentence with its meaning. (Rjurimalā, p. 135.) 
As a matter of fact, the Perception of each letter (of the Word) vanishes as soon as it appears; and so also the perception of each Word composing a Sentence. Hence it has been held that every such Perception leaves behind an Impression which leads on to the Perception of the next letter in the Word; and so on, the Impression left by these Letter-perceptions combines with that left by the last Letter of the Word, and thus brings about the idea of the Word as a whole, which brings about the idea of the meaning [though according to Prabhakara, all this happens for the first time in the experience of any one person, only when the Word thus cognised is found used in a Sentence- see below].-Each Word has thus to be regarded as having the potency of bringing about the comprehension of the meaning. In a case where, even on the due hearing of the Letters of the Word, no meaning is comprehended, it has to be admitted that some necessary auxiliaries to that comprehension are wanting. Thus the conclusion is that, in the ultimate analysis, it is the Letter- Sound that is the root-cause of Verbal Cognition; and what is true of the Letters as composing the Word is true also of the Words as composing the Sentence. This theory of Impressions' left by Letters has been justified on the ground that no other hypo- thesis can explain the well-known facts 
facts of experience. (See Brhati, pp. 160-161.) 
C 
4 
The next question is-What is meant by the Artha'— 'Meaning', Denotation of the Word? 
The Artha, Meaning, of the Word is what is expressed or denoted by it; and what is denoted by the Word is something to which it bears a relation which is independent of,-and not creat- ed and established by any personal agency. 
This Relation is that of the Denoter-Denoted, i.c., the Deno- tative Relation. Even though we do not comprehend the Mean- ing of a Word when we hear it for the first time, yet it cannot be denied that the Denotative Potency of the Word is something that belongs to it by its very nature, it is inherent in it. In our experi- ence, when we are listening to the conversation between two elder- ly persons, and fail to comprehend the meaning of the Words used by them, there arises in our minds an uncertainty as to whether 
F. 17 
130 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
or not the Words are expressive of any meaning at all; we proceed to reason in our minds that if the Words were entirely inexpres- sive, they could not convey any sense to the person to whom they are addressed;-from his behaviour, however, it is clear that he does derive the idea of something out of the words; and yet, if the Words are really expressive how is it that they do not convey any meaning to ourselves? The only explanation for this apparent anomaly must lie in the fact that in the person to whom the Words are addressed, there is something, some peculiar 
4 
Power, which is wanting in ourselve; this power must be in the shape of the knowledge of what is dehoted by the Word; it is such Power alone whose presence in the man is indicated by his behaviour. We can have no idea of the man having the knowledge of any Sanketa, or Con- vention, bearing upon the expressiveness of the Word,-i.c., some such conventional law as that this Word denotes this meaning, upon which law some philosophers have based the denotativeness of Words. Until we are ourselves cognisant of the meaning of the Word, we cannot form the idea of any such law bearing upon it, and the knowledge of the said law presupposes the knowledge of the meaning. From this it follows that the only power pre- sent in the person comprehending the meaing of a word consists in his knowledge of the fact that the Word is expressive of such a meaning. This proves that the expressiveness of the Word is something that belongs to it by its very nature, and is not created or produced by any person or thing. As this inherent expressive potency of the Word is sufficient to explain all phenomena of Verbal Expression and Cognition and Usage, there can be no justification for attributing the expressiveness to a Conven- tion. In the case of some Words-such as Proper Names-such a Convention has to be admitted-which applies certain names to certain persons. But in the case of common names-such as cow', jar','man' and so forth-there is no justification for postulating any Convention. Consequently the relation of all such Words to their meanings must be held to be Eternal. 
' 
< 
Exactly the same is true of the Sentence also; the relation of which to its meaning is Eternal; 'the relation between the Sentence and the Meaning of the Sentence is inborn, Eternal says Prabhakara (Bṛhati, p. 135), on which the Ṛjuvimalā remarks- The inborn character of the Relation is in reference 
C 
CHAPTER XIV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA 131 
C 
4 
to the Sentence itself; because the mere Word, simply by itself, expresses no meaning, it expresses a meaning and is comprehend- ed only when occuring in a Sentence; and what is expressive by its very nature is the Sentence, and not any single Word by itself. The Mimamsaka lays stress upon this denotativeness—i.e., the relation between the Verbal Expression and the Idea Expres- sed-being inborn, Eternal, because if it were not so, the validity of the Scriptural texts would be based upon the whim of the agencies creating and setting up the said Relation, or of the person uttering those texts. And thus, as he denies all personal agency in the composition of the Veda, there would ipso facto be no vali- dity in the Vedic texts themselves. Nor can the Mimamsaka accept the Logician's point of view, by which the denotativeness of words. is created and fixed by Convention' among people who introduce, and make use of, the Words for the first time,-accord- ing to the Logician, created by God Himself. This view necessi- tates the postulating of a God' as the Creator of all Words and their denotations, and hence of the Veda itself; and this militates against the Mimämsä-doctrine of the Eternality and Self-Suffi- ciene of the Veda, which must be independent of all personal influence of any kind. In fact, if the denotativeness of Words depended solely upon Convention,' the Veda would be reduced to the position of a meaningless jumble of words; because, accord- ing to the Mimamsaka, the pre-eminent function of the Veda lies in the enjoining of certain acts as bringing about an Apūrva -an imperceptible, Subtle Forec--leading to a definite result; and as this Force is something of which no Person could have any direct knowledge, except through the Veda-how could the deno- tativeness of those words of the Veda be fixed by any Convention? And as no Convention could be found applicable to these words, these would, according to the Logician's view, have to be regarded as absolutely meaningless. If a Creator, God, were admitted, then as this God, being omniscient, would be possessed of the direct knowledge of the said Apura, He would be in a position to lay down the Conventions with regard to the denotativeness of Words, including the Word denoting the Apurva. But to the Mimämsaka the idea of an omnicient Person, like God, or any one else, is wholly inacceptable; hence for the sake of the Veda, his all-in-all, he finds it necessary to stick to the view that all Words and their Denotations are eternal, ever-lasting, independent of 
132 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĂ IN ITS SOURCES 
all conventions and agencies and influences.-(Vide Prakaraṇa- pañchikā, p. 133 et. saq.) 
We have seen that the denotation of words-i.e., the relation between Words and their Denotation-is Eternal, without begin- ning or end. Now as regards the Eternality of the Words them- selves, it has been pointedd out that we comprehend the meaning of Words by observing their use among experienced people on various occasions. If then, at each time the older man speaks of a thing, he were to create a new name for it for the occasion,- which name could disappear as soon as uttered,-necessary coro- Ilaries of the view that the Word is evanescent,-then what basis would the younger man have for observing the frequent use of the Word and thereby ascertaining its meaning? As each time that the thing is spoken of, he would be face to face with a newly. created Word, never heard before; and under the circumstances, the meaning of the Word would remain ever uncomprehended and incomprehensible; and until the Word affords some Cognition, it cannot be regarded as a Valid Means of Cognition (pramana). Consequently, unless the Logician is prepared to deny this charac- ter to the Word, he must accept it as Eternal. Then there arises the question "If the Word is Eternal, why is it not always present in our Consciousness?" The answer to this is that, though the Words is ever present, yet, in order that it may become cognised, it stands in need of certain auxiliary aids that serve to manifest it and render it cognisable, or present it to our consciousness. This manifestive agency consists in the Effort put forth by the man who utters the Word. The Logician regards this Effort as the Cause producing the Word; but in reality, it is only a force or agency that serves to manifest to our Consciousness the Word that is already in existence, but imperceptible. And as these Efforts may be many, there need be no incongruity in the same Word being uttered, and heard, by several persons; whenever the mani- festive agency is present and active the Word will become mani- fested and heard. Hence if there are several men putting forth the Effort for uttering a Word, it is only natural that there should be several manifestations of the Word. That it is the same Word that is cognised in each of these cases is proved by our direct Cognition of all of these as one and the same. And this is another reason for regarding the Word as Eternal. The Effort put forth by the speaker is not in itself sufficient to account for 
CHAPTER XIV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA 133 
the Cognition of the Word; and in that case we could not account for the non-cognition of the Word by the deaf. In fact, the Effort tends to manifest the Word only through certain effects that it produces in the auditory organ of the person standing by. The several steps in the physiological process of speech have been thus explained: -(1) The speaker puts forth an Effort, (2) this Effort brings the Speaker's Soul into contact with the Air en- closed within his lungs, (3) in obedience to the impulse imparted by the Effort, the Air in the lungs is expelled outwards, (4) in its upward progress, it comes into cntact with the vocal chords, (5) these contacts modify the character of the said Air, (6) on issu- ing from the mouth, the Air passes onwards and reaches the auditory organs of the persons standing near enough to be reach- ed by the Air-waves,-the extent of the reach of this Air depends upon the greater or less degree of the initial Effort of the Speaker; (7) on reaching the said Auditory Organs, the Air- waves produce in those organs a certain change that is conducive to its power of making the Sound audible. Thus it is this faculty of the Auditory Organ that is the direct Agent manifesting the Word to the Consciousness of the Persons to whom the Auditory Organs belong. As the Air-current is endowed with a certain momentum, by virtue of which it keeps moving oinwards-when it has passed out of the Auditory Organ, the Sound also passes out and the audition ceases, the person hears the Sound no longer. The next question that arises is- What is the change in the Auditory Organ which renders it capable of manifesting Sound?” What happens is that the Air-waves issuing out of the Speaker's mouth, strikes the first layer of Air enclosed within the hearer's Tympanum and produces in the latter a peculiar modification whereby it is rendered capable of manifesting Sound and making it audible. To this end, the Mimamsaka postulates the presence, in the ear-cavity, of the fixed layer of Air, for the purpose of affording a screen of resistance to the Sound-waves; against which screen these waves strike and thereby effect the change in the Auditory Organ. It is a well-recognised fact that Air cannot pro- duce any effects unless it meets with a certain degree of resis- tance. Even though the Auditory Organ consists of Akasha, and Akasha is one only, yet the Ear-Drum is distinct in each person- each being limited in its power and scope by virtue of the Merit- Demerit of the person to whom it belongs. Then again, the 
134 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
change produced in the Sound-waves is not in the Akasha of the Ear, but in the Air enclosed within the Ear-Drum; and as this latter differs in each person, all men need not hear the Sound that may be heard by one of them. That all this diversity is due to Airwaves is also indicated by the fact that when Sound-waves travel with the wind, the Sound is heard at a greater distance than when they travel against the Wind. 
Lastly, each time that we hear a Word (or Sentence) uttered, we at once recognise it as being the same, and not as different in each case. 
Even though it may be uttered in varying degrees of loudness, yet all the difference that we are cognisant of is that in the tone or pitch of the Sound,-not in the Word itself, which latter is always recognised to be the same. 
For these reasons the conclusion is that the Word (and Sentence) has no cause bringing it into existence, and thus it has the same Eternality that belongs to Akasha and such other things. 
The above leads us on to the question of the exact denota- tion of Words: Does the Word (name of things, noun) denote the Universal (Class) or the Particular (Individual) or both? The ground for doubt on this point (as expounded by Shabara, above) is that while the Cognition brought about by the Word pertains to the Class, the Action that follows the Word (.e., the Injunc- tion) pertains to the Individual. This same view has been ex- pressed by Prabhākara (Bṛhati. MS., p. 36, b)-who holds the Anvitābhidhāna theory of Verbal Expression, according to which the Denotation of a Word is cognisable only through its connec- tion with a particular action; hence, as each Sentence would appertain to some action, which by its very nature, must appertion to an Individual, his theory would appear to lend support to the Individualistic theory of Denotation. 
The practical purpose of the present enquiry lies in the fact that, if all Words denoted Individuals, there could be no differen- tiation of rules into General and Special-i.e., the General Law and its exceptions-and thus it would not be possible for the former to be set aside by the latter; and this would give rise to much confusion in the actual interpretation of the Vedic texts bearing upon the rules regarding actions. But Prabhakara in his characteristic manner, has turned this question also on to the main 
CHAPTER XIV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA 135 
subject of the First Discourse-i.e., the reliability of the Veda relating to Dharma, The Pūrvapakṣa view therefore, according to him would be that-" it being doubtful whether Words denote Universals or Farticulars, the exact meaning of the Vedic texts must remain doubtful, and this vitiates the validity and authority of the Vedic texts." 
C 
6 
The answer to the above, i.e., Prabhakara's Siddanta on this question is that in reality, there is nothing doubtful regarding the denotation of Words; it is the Universal that is denoted by the Word, because it serves the purpose of actions. (Su. 33). The reason for this as given by Prabhakara (and also by Shabara, -see above) is that, if the Word denoted the Individual or Par- ticular, we could not explain such Injunctions as The altar is to be built like a kite'; as it would be impossible for altars to be made in every case like a particular kite. The word kite,' there- fore, must denote the Class, the Universal'; and that alone can form the denotation of the Word which is found to be related to a Sentence (Injunction),—and here, as we find the Individual or Particular kite incapable of being so related, the Word must be taken as denoting the Universal' or Class. The Brhati (MS., p. 37 b) puts forth the objection that though all this may be true in the case of the particular Injunction cited (with the word 'kite'),—in the case of other Sentences, it is equally evident that the Word cannot be taken as denoting the Universal'; hence the matter of the exact denotation of Words remains as doubtful as ever, and that fact vitiates the authority of the Vedic Sen- tence." In answer to this, it is pointed out that, as a matter of fact, we find that the injunctive function of an Injunctive Sentence cannot be accomplished until its words afford some idea of "commonality "; consequently all actions must be reiated to that Commonality or Community, or 'Universal'-or Class- Character, and not to the Particular or Individual; the idea of the Particular or Individual, where necessary, is obtained in- directly, through that class-character with which it is insepar- ably connected. 
MEANING OF THE SENTENCE ACCORDING TO PRABUĀKARA. 
It has been seen that according to Prabhākara, people learn the meaning of Words only by watching the usage and activity 
136 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
of older people. When a set of words is addressed by one person to another, whereupon the latter person acts in a certain manner, it is clear to the observer that the meaning of the words pronounced must have been in the form of an Injunction to do what the other person has done. In the case of Words where such an interpretation is not possible, the comprehension of the meaning must depend upon something indirectly connected with the Injunction. This is the reason why Prabhakara has asserted in connection with the definition of Verbal Cognition that the object cognised must be one that has not been already cognised by another means of Cognition; and this can be so always in the case of the Injunctive Sentence. All words with the Imperative or similar terminations express the Injunction directly, while other words denote things related to that Injunction; such things, for instance, as the name of the Act enjoined, the person enjoined and so on. This leads to the view that the whole direct denotation of the Veda must lie in the enjoining of something to be done. This goes directly against the view of the Vedantin that the direct denotation of the more important texts lies, not in the laying down of something to be done, but in the pointing out of certain well-accomplished entities like Brahman, the Super-Soul. As against this Vedanta view, it has been pointed out (Bṛhati., p. 47) that, though such may be the case with a few words, yet the comprehension of the denotation of those words also could be obtained only by osberving the usage of older persons, and this usage must always lie in the form of an Injunction addressed by one person to another for the doing of a certain act; thus ulti- mately the denotation of all Words must lie, directly or indirect- ly, with something to be done. The Vedanta-texts also speak of the Super-Soul as something which one is enjoined to know and meditate upon, in order to escape from the cycle of Births and Deaths. 
Thus then, if the meaning of the Words can be known only when they occur in Injunctive Sentences, it follows that every Word must denote things only as related to the other factors of the Injunction, and no word can be comprehended as having any denotation when taken apart from such Sentence. Says Prabhi- kara (Bṛhati, p. 135) What is eternal is the Relation which the Sentence bears to what it expresses,'-on which the Rjuvimalā remarks The Word, alone by itself, never expresses any mean- 
-- 
( 
CHAPTER XIV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA 137 
ing; it is only the Sentence that does it; as is clear from the fact that we learn the meaning of Verbal expressions only from the usage of older people,-and this usage is only in the form of Sentences; and every single Word is understood only in so far as it is related to the other words in the Sentence; hence it becomes established that what is expressive of the meaning is the Sentence only, not any l'ord alone by itself.-(Rjuvimală, p. 135.) 
Herein we have what has been called the Anvitabhidhāna Theory of Verbal Expression. This forms a distinctive feature of the Prabhakara School of Thought,-and it has the tacit sup- port of the Sutra (1.1.25) and also of Shabara (Trs., p. 44, and 132 of Bib. Ind. Text). 
6 
C 
Says the Brhati (p. 188)- वाक्यार्थेन व्यवहार; that is, all usage is through the Sentence and its meaning. How is this to be reconciled with the assertion in the Bhasya that the Word cow' denotes the Class or Universal distinguished by the dewlap '?-how too can this be regarded as 'eternal,' when it is based upon the usage of experienced people? In order to meet this difficulty which involves alt inconsistency between the Premiss and the Conclusion,-the Bhasya has provided an expla- nation later on, under Sū. 1.1.25. 
4 
C 
On this the Rjurimala remarks-The Conclusion stands for the declaration of the Eternality of the Relationship, and the Premiss' stands for the beginninglessness of the usage.' The inconsistency between these two has been explained away in the Bhasya, where it has been pointed out that words express the meaning of the Sentence only through the comprehension of the meaning of the words themselves. (See Bhasya under 1.1.25). The Riuvimalā (pp. 190-191) has summed up this controversy in the following words:- 
There are some people whose mind is led away by the decla- matory descriptions of the Creation and Dissolution of the World; to this class belong Kanāda, Gautama and their followers. These people declare that God is the one Cause, Creator, of the whole Universe. They argue thus" We see that every composite object comes into existence through the coming together-Con- junction-of their component parts;-all worldly things, the Body and the various Regions, are composite in their nature;-the conjunction of component particle is found to go on till the 
F. 19138 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Diad-the Two-Atom Compound; which Diad also is composite, being composed of two atoms. The conjunction between the two Atoms is brought about by the action-vibration-of the two Atoms; and this Vibration in the Atoms is due to the conjunction of Souls influenced by the Unseen Force (of Destiny);-this Un- seen Force is non-intelligent, unconscious, by its nature;-and as a matter of fact no non-intelligent entity is found to act except under the guidance of an intelligent operator. This operator of the Unseen Force could not be those same Souls that are them- selves under the influence of that same Force;-because they are not cognisant of this Force-which is made up of their own Merit-Demerit, of which however they themselves are not con- scious-and the operator of the Force must be one who knows it; -hence all this leads us to postulate an Intelligent Being apart from the said Souls; and this Controller and Operator of these Unseen Forces is one possessed of very superior Intelligence. Thus the entire Universe comes to be regarded as having had a beginning and having been brought to the present stage through a long series of products beginning with the Atomic Diad, brought about by conjunctions due to vibrations in the Atoms due to the said Unseen Force, under the Control of the Great Operator of Superior Intelligence. Thus having had a beginning, the World must come to an end. How then can there be a beginningless usage of Experienced People upon which all Verbal Usage could be based ?" 
The Mimamsaka's answer to the above is as follows: [Rjuvi- mală, p. 191]:-All this argumentation may be very soul-satisfy- ing. But what has got to be explained is-how is it that the entire World of Composite Things becomes dissolved all at once simultaneously. At the present time we find that while one thing is coming into existence, another is disappearing; when such is the fact of common experience, who can deny the beginning- less tradition of usage among experienced people? Then again, if the ordinary Intelligent Beings-the ordinary Souls-are un- able to control Destiny, by reason of their being non-cognisant of their own Destiny,-then how can an entirely distinct Soul (the Super-Soul, God) be the Controller? The absence of the know- ledge of the Destiny of Souls would be there in His case also. Specially because the idea is that all Cognition (knowledge of things-) proceeds from Mind-Soul contact through Sense-object- 
CHAPTER XIV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHĀKARA 139 
C 
contacts, all these contacts being due to Destiny; and all these contacts could not be there, for the cognising (and controlling) of Destiny (even by God). . . Nor is it right to regard God's Cognition as eternal; because the fact universally recognised is that every Cognition is produced and destroyed; so that God's Cognition also must be the same. Further, what is the meaning of the control' exercised by God? The only control that is inferable is one of the same kind as that exercised by the Carpenter over the Implements; but no such control' is possible in the case of God. As for 'Destiny' itself, its action can be no other than its coming into existence; and this is brought about by such acts as sacrificing and the like. The God-Idea therefore is too flimsy to receive serious attention. That is why the Bhāṣya and the. Brhati have taken no notice of it. (Ṛjuvimalā, pp. 190- 191.) 
VEDA IS NOT THE WORK OF A PERSONAL AUTHOR ACCORDING TO 
C 
PRABHAKARA, 
According to Prabhakara, we can derive a truly valid Verbal Cognition only from Words and Sentences contained in the Veda. 
This, he says, is clear from the very name given to the Means of Cognition, Shastra' which means Scripture, or more precisely, Scriptural Injunction. As a necessary corrolary to this, it is held that, apart from the Words found in the Scriptures, no Words can provide any Cognition of things not already known through other means of knowledge; all words used in common parlance are mostly only such as denote things that can be cognised through Perception and Inference also; while things not cognised through these can be rightly cognised only when described by words of unquestionable authority and trustworthy character. From this it follows that Cognitions provided by Words other than these,- and all non-Vedic Words and Sentences belong to this other category-can have no inherent validity by themselves. 
This theory becomes divested of much of its apparent aburd- ity when we realise the fact that, the Scriptural Word alone is free from all defects in its source (as it has no source at all), and hence inherently valid; and hence no other Words can be regarded as affording invariably valid Cognitions; specially when it is found that in common parlance, most of the Cognitions obtained through Words of ordinary men turn out to be invalid and un- 
140 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
reliable. Hence at. best, Cognitions derived from Non-Scriptural Words can be regarded to be of the same kind as Remembrance; and hence of doubtful validity. And as Cognitions of doubtful validity cannot be accepted as Cognition' proper, which, by its very nature, must be always valid, the conclusion is irresistible that Non-Scriptural words cannot provide any Cognition, in the proper sense of the term; they are mere translators or reflectors or describers of what is in the mind of the person uttering the words; and the validity of these reflectors can be ascertained only by other means of knowledge. It is in reference to such Non- Scriptural words that we have the saying— पदमप्यधिकाभावात्स्म रकान्न विशिष्यते, that is, the Word is nothing more than what pro- 
C 
vides Remembrance? (Shlo. Va. Shabda 107). 
This cannot be true of the words of the Veda. Because in the case of non-Vedic Words, its invalidity or doubtful validity is based upon the generally untrustworthy character of speakers, -which is due to many such causes as wrong information, wrong understanding, incapacity to use the right words, and so on. In the case of the Words of the Veda, on the other hand, as they do not emanate from a Speaker or author, there can be none of these causes to which the falsity of the assertion may be due. In the case of the words of ordinary men, even when we find them pro- viding a reasonably connected sense, there is always a lurking suspicion that there may be some defect in the source from which the speaker has derived the information that he is seeking to convey by means of the words in question; and for this reason we can never be absolutely sure of the validity of the Cognition pro- vided by such words, which, for this reason cannot be regarded as the Means of Right Cognition', Pramāņa. Even in cases where ordinary words do afford valid Cognitions, it is not the Words that bring about the Cognitions directly; what occurs is that on hearing the Words, we find that they convey a certain information, and then we proceed to reason that, the speaker is a trustworthy person as not one of the grounds of untrustworthi- ness-such as greed and the like,-is found in him, hence what he says must be true; hence the information conveyed by his word must be true.' Thus in these cases, the Words are not the Direct Cause of the valid Cognition, they only indirectly indicate the presence of the Cognition in the Speaker's mind, in so far as 
CHAPTER XIV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA 141 
the hearer is concerned, the Words are not the Means of Valid Cognition, Pramana;-at any rate, not independently of the Inference that is involved in the process of the Cognition in the Speaker's mind. All such cases involve a clear inferential process; such as for instance, as- This speaker has a particular Cognition in his mind, because he has pronounced these words (and he is a reliable person).' 
4 
• 
This view of Verbal Cognition and Shabda-Pramana has been set forth in the Prakarana pañchikā (pp. 15 et saq); where we read-It is only the leda that can be called Shabda-Pramāna; and that also only when containing an Injunction; words of common parlance cannot be so, because the Cognition produced by them is purely inferential. When, for instance, we hear a man saying something, our mind goes through the following reasoning This man speaks of such and such a thing-this he must be speaking of after having known what he speaks of,- hence what he says must be true'. The speech of the man is an effect of his knowledge, and hence from the Effect (Speech) we infer its Cause (the man's knowledge). Thus all ordinary Verbal Cognition is inferential, while that provided by the Veda alone is purely l'erbal. It is true that all Words are endowed with an inborn denotative potency, but in the case of the ordinary speakers of the world, this inborn potency of the Word becomes obscured by the suspicions regarding the capacity and trustworthy character of the person concerned. On the other hand, in the case of the Veda, there being no speaker concerned, there can be no grounds for such suspicion, and the inherent Potency remains unobscured. 
It is interesting to note in this connection that Kanāda (in the Vaishĕşika-Sutra 1.1.3; 2.3.32; 9.2.3; and 10.2.9-regarding the Veda as the work of a Person (God), has declared that Verbal Cognition, is nothing apart from Inferential Cognition, as all words emanating from persons provide only Inferential Cog- nitions, and there is no such thing as purely Verbal Cognition; hence Shabda need not be regarded as a distinct Pramāņa, Means of Cognition. From this it is clear that Shabda as a distinct Means of Cognition can be acknowledged only by those who regard the Veda as Eternal, and not the work of an author. (See below) 
142 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Just as in the case of the other Pramanas, so here also, if we regard the term 'Shastra' as an Accusative Abstract Noun- Shisyate yat tat-equivalent to Shisti', then it is synonymous with Verbal (or Scriptural) Cognition; but if it is taken as an Instrumental Abstract Noun-Shişyaë anena-then it is syno- nymous with the Word providing Verbal Cognition. 
4 
This Word '-which, according to Prabhakara, is the some as Scriptural Tert-is of two kinds :-(1) Those actually found in the Veda and (2) those, the presence of which in the Veda is inferred. To the latter class belong all those texts that are inferred as supplying the basic authority for the Injunctions of actions contained in the Smṛtis,-whose sole claim to authority rests upon the fact that they contain no Injunctions save those vouched for by Vedic texts. 
C 
< 
It may be observed here, as remarked by the Prakaraṇapan- chikā (p. 101), that the Shastra,' or Vedic Injunction often stands in need of some factors being supplied from without; e.g., the text that speaks of a certain action merely as accomplishing a certain desirable result, stands in need of some such Injunctive words as that this act should be done'; and these words have to be supplied. Similarly, certain texts stand in need of certain well-ascertained facts of experience; e.g., for ascertaining the true significance of the injunction Udbhida yajēta,' one should perform the Udbhid.' it is necessary to call in the help of ordi- nary experience; the word "Udbhid' in ordinary language means a tree; so the text might well be taken to mean that should perform the tree'; but here our experience steps in and tells us that such a performance would be an impossibility and it is only an account of this impossibility that we are led to take the word Udbhid' in the text as the name of a particular sacri- fice, which is the correct interpretation. (Vide Mīmā. Sū. 1.4.2.) 
C 
one 
how to determine the Sentence or text,—the 
Then, as regards the question as to facts of certain words forming a single principle adopted is that just as a number of letters denoting a certain conceptual unit is regarded as one Word, so when a number of words express a single complete conceptual Idea, they are regarded as one Sentence. (Mimā. Sā. 2.1.16-see below-the Principle of Syntactical Convention.) 
CHAPTER XIV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHĀKARA 143 
We have seen that the Veda is not the work of a Person or Author. This is proved by the fact that all words and things denoted by them are Eternal (see above), and there is no other means (save the Veda) available for the Knowledge of Dharma,- including as it does the notion of such supersensuous thing as Apurca and the like; and the Veda itself, as only a collection of words speaking of such things, must be Eternal, and as such in- dependent of all authorship. 
The Brhati (p. 403) asks- What is the meaning of the opponent's assertion that the Veda is an Effect, a product? It has been proved that Words are eternal and so also is the relation of Words with their Denotations; what else then is there in the Veda which could be a product? The answer is that what is meant by the opponent regarding the Veda as an Effect or product is that it is dependent upon other Means of Cognition; and he argues that the fact of the Veda being so is shown by the presence there of such words as Babara, the son of Pravahana and so forth. The Mimaisaka's answer is that all such instances adduc- ed by the other party are capable of being explained away and they do not prove the said dependence of the Veda. The rest of it can be learnt from the Bhasya (see above). 
C 
C 
CHAPTER XV 
(C) VERBAL COGNITION 
ACCORDING TO KUMARII.A. 
Kumarila and his followers do not restrict Shabda-Pramāṇa' to Vedic Injunctions only, as is done by Prabhakara. The former divide the Shabda-Pramāņa' into two classes-(1) Pauruṣēya, Personal, and Apauruşēya, Impersonal. Under the Personal Word are included all words uttered by trustworthy personal beings, and under the Impersonal Word come the words of the Veda. Both of them are ralid; and the reason given for this view is that the only ground of the invalidity of a Word lies in the fact of its emanating from an untrustworthy Source, and this ground is as absent in the case of the words of trustworthy persons as in that of the words of the Veda. 
C 
The reason why the author of the Bhasya has defined Shabda under the name of Shastra,' Scriptural Word,' is not that he confines valid Verbal Cognition to the Scriptural Word only, but that it is this latter alone that bears upon the subject-matter of study-i.e., Dharma,-and it is the Vedic Word alone that bears upon Dharma. (Shlo. Va., Shabda 1.10.) 
The Vaisheṣikas and the Bauddhas have both included Verbal Cognition under Inference. But this is denied by Kumārila on the groud that under formal definitions, the two cognitions- Verbal and Inferential-might appear to be the same; but that cannot justify the identification of the two; as the conditions of Inferential Cognition might be fulfilled in the case of Personal Word, they cannot be fulfilled by the Cognition derived from the Vedic Word. (Shlo. Va., Shabda 51.) 
For the same reason the Word, as a means of Valid Cognition, cannot be defined as the teaching of a trustworthy person'; as there is no possibility of any such person' in the case of the Vedic Word. Hence we conclude that the Cognition that is brought about by Words is Verbal Cognition, and (like all Cog- nitions) it is self-sufficient in its validity (Ibid., 53); and it is on this point of Self-validity alone that Verbal Cognition may be regarded as similar to Inferential Cognition (Ibid., 54). Kumārila (Ibid. 54 et. seq.) has entered into a long explanation of the points of difference between the Inferential Probans and the 
141 
CHAPTER XV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO KUMĀRILA 148 
Word as the means, respectively, of Inferential and Verbal Cognitions; and the conclusion arrived at is that Verbal Cognition does not fulfil the three conditions that are essential in all In- ference, and hence it is as distinct from Inference as Sense-per- ception itself (Ibid. 98). 
" 
Kumarila appears to be slightly halting on this point, and he seems to concede that the knowledge derived from Individual Words might be included under Inference'; and goes on to point out that the Cognition provided by the Sentence can never come under Inference (Ibid. 108-110). 
WHAT IS WORD? 
The Word is not anything apart from the component letters, and just as several subsidiary acts in an Elaborate Sacrifice com- bine to bring about the final result,-so the several letters com- posing a Word combine to bring about the Cognition of its Deno- tation (Shastra-dipikā, pp. 70-71). The order of sequence too belongs, not to the Letters, but to the Letter-Sounds, and through these latter, it is imposed upon the Letters that are manifested by those Sounds. Hence it is Letters alone that can be expressive of meanings. (Ibid., p. 73.) 
WHAT IS IT THAT IS DENOTED BY THE WORD? 
The ground of doubt on this point as put forward in the Bhāṣya (See above) is that- While the Cognition pertains to the Universal, the Action enjoined pertains to the Individual.' This same view has been accepted by Prabhakara, who holds that the Denotation of a Word is cognised only through its connection with a Particular Act, and each Sentence would naturally per- tain to some Individual Act. The theory would appear to lend support to the Individualistic Theory of Denotation. 
Kumarila naturally does not admit of this ground of doubt; and his dissatisfaction is based upon the fact that the Cognition is often found to pertain to the Individual also, not always to the Universal, as asserted by Shabara. Kumarila bases his doubt regarding the true denotation of words upon the fact that both Usage and Cognition are found severally to apply to the Universal and the Individual, while works on Grammar lend support to the view that it is the Individual that is denoted. The practical purpose of the present enquiry lies in the fact that if all. 
F. 19 
146 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
words denoted only Individuals, then there 
could be no differentiation of Rules into General ahd Special (the General Law and its Exception), and thus it would not be possible for the former to be set aside by the latter, and this would give rise to much confusion. 
According to Murari Mishra also, what is denoted by the Word is the Akṛti; as it is only with this that the relationship of the Word can be apprehended. What is comprehended through the Word is the Individual as qualified by the Akṛti; because the qualified cannot be conceived of without an idea of a qualifying factor; the expressive potency of the Word however rests in the Akrti; but mere Akṛti or Jati is never apprehended by itself alone; it is always apprehended along with the Individual. (MS., p. 60.) 
He goes on to say-Mere Jati by itself is incapable of being manifested, it is always dependent on something else, hence it becomes manifested only when this something else is manifested (p. 62). 
Kumārila also accepts the view that it is the Universal that is denoted. But he is not satisfied with the presentation of the case by Shabara, and sets it forth in his own words, as follows: (Tantravārtika on 1.1.33, Translation, pp. 363-365). 
It is the Universal that is denoted by the Word. Why? (1) Because it is the Universal that is cognised before the Indi- vidual; (2) because a Word is not found to give rise to a mixed conception; and (3) because when the order bring a cow is given, the person ordered brings any cow that he likes. 
C 
To explain these arguments-(1) When the Word cow' is uttered, before we have an idea of any individuals, it is the Uni- versal that we have an idea of; and when the form of this Uni- versal has been duly comprehended, then alone are the Indivi- duals cognised. Thus, in as much as for the Cognition of the Universal there is no other means save the Word, while the Cognition of the Individuals is actually brought about by the Cognition of the Universal, we conclude that the Word denotes the Universal. 
(2) If the Individuals were denoted by the Word, then, in as much as the individual cows are found to have various charac- ters such as the variegated colour, absence of horns, etc.,-the 
CHAPTER XV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO KUMĀRILA 147 
idea brought about by the Word would be a mixed one (partaking of all these characters), while as a matter of fact, we find the word giving rise to a single uniform conception (of the common Universal cow '), and thus too we conclude that it is the Ini- versal that is denoted by the Word.. 
C 
3 
(3) When a person is ordered to bring a cow', if no particular cow happens to be specially indicated, either by the character of the work in hand, or by the other concurrent circumstances, the person ordered is found to bring in any common cow and not any particularly specified cow, or all the cows in the world. If, however, the individual cow were denoted by the word, then the mention of the word cow would have indicated all the indivi- dual cows in the world, which would have to be brought in by the person ordered, or he could bring in only that one particular cow which would be denoted by the word. But, as a matter of fact, we find that he brings in any common cow, with the only restriction that it should possess the common character of the cow.' And hence too we conclude that the Universal is denoted by the Word. 
4 
If, however, the individual be held to be denoted by the Word, there could only be the three following alternatives :— (1) That all Individuals should be denoted independently by themselves; (2) or that the aggregate of all Individuals as quali- fied by a particular individual should be denoted; (3) or that one particular Individual be denoted. 
(1) Now, it is not possible for all Individuals to be denoted; (a) because that would necessitate the assumption of manifold denotative potencies in the Word; (b) because the Individuals being transient, the relationship between the Word and its Denotation would be transient (c) because the conception of all the Individuals being absolutely impossible, the full relationship of the Word with the Denotation would never be comprehended, and as such there could be no using of the word or any business carried on (such as the following of one another's directions etc.); (d) as referring to many Individuals the word cow would be always used in the plural, like the word 'eight'; and as such it would never be possible to apply to it either the dual or the singular number; (e) as the white colour cannot subsist in all the individual cows denoted by the word 'cow', there could be no co- 
C148 
C 
" 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
extensiveness (of the qualification and the qualified) in the expression white cow'; and (f) because in the case of the Vedic Injunction One should sacrifice with the animals,' as it would be impossible to perform a sacrifice with all individual animals, such Injunctions, and hence the entire Veda, would lose authority. 
(2) Similarly too, it is not possible to admit the Aggregate of Individuals to be denoted by the Word; (a) because in this case also all the Individuals will have to be taken as denoted, as form- ing the Aggregate, and hence this theory would be open to all the aforesaid six objections; (b) because such a theory would neces- sitate the assumption of an Aggregate apart from the Individuals; (c) and as no usage is found to appertain to any such Aggregate, the Denotation of the Word would be absolutely useless as the sole use of the Denotation lies in the accomplishment of Usage; (d) the units forming the Aggregate being all perishable, their Aggregate would also be perishable, and hence the relationship of the Word with its Denotation would become transient; (e) the Aggregate being one only, there could be no plural or dual number in Nouns; (f) nor could there be any co-extensiveness between the qualification and the qualified, in expressions like 'white cow'; because the Aggregate of all cows cannot be said to be white; (g) the Aggregate being shapeless, no sacrifice could be performed with it and that would shake the authority of all Vedic Injunctions. 
(3) If a single individual be held to be denoted by the Word, then too-(a) there would be non-eternality of the relationship of the Word and its Denotation; (b) as it could not be ascertained which one particular individual is denoted, no business would be possible; (c) there could be no idea of Community or common character; (d) Nouns could never have the Plural or the Dual Number; (e) no use of the word cow' could be possible, prior to the birth, and after the death, of the particular cow denoted; (f) the word cow' giving rise to an idea of the cow' in general, there can be no particular reason for asserting that it is only this particular cow, and not that, which is denoted by the word. 
C 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WORD AND ITS DENOTATION- 
ACCORDING TO KUMARILA. 
The main thesis of the Mimamsaka is that what the Veda says must be true, never false, because it is not dependent upon 
CHAPTER XV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO KUMARILA 149 
a speaker or personal author,-being as independent and eternal as the Word and its Denotation; and the Cognition or knowled ge derived from the Veda must be true,-because it is eternal, because it is provided by the Sentence. 
It has been shown above that the Word, as composed by Letters, is eternal; so also what is denoted by the Word,-viz., the Class or Universal; and the logical corollary to all this must be that the Relation between the Word and its Denotation also must be eternal. (Shlo. Va., Sambandhākṣēpa, 1-4.) 
The existence of this Relation is proved by positive and negative concomitance; and this is learnt by experience. This relation of Denotations is deduced from the fact that until the relation has been grasped the Word does not provide the idea of the denoted Universal, and when the Relation is grasped, the 
• Universal' btcomes cognised. And all this indicates the Deno- tative Potency of the Word. 
The other party argues-"We admit that there is this Relation between the Word and its Denotation. But you must admit that this Relation is dependent upon the experience of men, something evanescent, not Eternal." (Ibid., 45). 
• 
The answer to this is given by Kumarila (in Shlo, Va., Sambhandhākṣēpaparihāra, 13 et. seq.) as follows:-If the Deno- tativeness of words is something created by some sort of Conven- tion among men, then there are only three ways in which this Convention could function,-(1) A Convention would be set up for the benefit of each man-each one being told that Such is the meaning of this Word,' or (2) this Convention would be set up each time the Word is pronounced; or (3) the Convention would be set up by God Himself for all time, at the time of creating the Word.-(1) Under the first alternative, that the Convention is set up for the benefit of each person,-would the Relationship fixed by such Convention be one and the same for all men, would it be different with each individual? If it is one and the same for all, then it cannot be artificial; and the idea of its being diverse and different would be contrary to all experience.-(2) The Second view,-that "a Convention is set up each time that the Word is pronounced "-is impossible, because a single utterance and the Convention based thereupon can never fix for all time the Convention between the Word and its Denotation; nor could it 
or 
150 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
account for the usage of the same for all time.-(3) As regards the third alternative-that "the Convention was set up by God at the beginning of the World."-in the first place there is no such thing as beginning of the World' (Ibid., 42); and second- ly there is no God or Creator of the World (see above) who could set up the Convention (Ibid., 44). 
4 
• 
Even granting that there has been Creation, the Veda and its component Words and their Denotations must have been in existence even before that (Ibid., 116); and the said Relation between those Words and their meanings could have had no beginning in time (Ibid., 123 and 137). 
In fact in connection with all 
all Verbal Expression. what happens is that when the inexperienced boy hears the use of cer- tain words for the first time by people more 
more experienced,-he perecives the Word-Sound, the experienced person and the mate- rial objets handled by them as the result of their conversation,- and the fact, that the person addressed has understood the mean- ing of the Words used by the other man, he infers from the resultant activity of the person addressed;—and then he pre- sumes the fact of the Words used having the potency, the power, the capacity, to express what has been comprehended by the person addressed, as without such potency, the phenomenon noticed could not be accounted for. Thus the presence of the Relationship between the Word and its Denotation is got at and comprehended through three means of Cognition, Perception, Inference and Presumption. (Ibid., 141.) 
ETERNALITY OF THE WORD. 
The Mimamsaka holds the Word to be Eternal; it is there always; we do not perceive (hear) it always, because its being perceived is dependent upon its being manifested by the manifes- tation of the Word-Sound brought about by certain manifesting agencies, and as the functioning of these manifesting Word- Sounds varies with varying distance and other circumstances, this accounts for the variations of time and place in the perception of the Word-Sound, and hence of the Word. 
the Word. There is no good reason therefore for regarding the Word as non-eternal. 
On the other hand, in support of its Eternality, we have the Presumption based upon the fact that the meaning of the Word 
CHAPTER XV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO KUMARILA 151 
cannot be comprehended except on the hypothesis of its eternality. If at each utterance of it, the Word were a distinct unit, just produced, then its meaning could never be comprehended; because this comprehension depends upon the comprehension of the rela- tion of concomitance between the Word and its meaning; and no such concomitance could be perceived if at each utterance, the Word were a different unit, just produced, and not the same. Mere similarity of the Word-Sound could not account for the said notion of the concomitance. As all the Word- units would be of equal importance, which unit would it be whose similarity to the others could be the determin- ing factor? In fact, in order to explain the phenomenon of the comprehension of the meaning of a Word, the Word must be regarded as one and the same in all cases. Nor can this requisite unity be obtained by the postulating of such comprehensive ⚫ Classes' as the Letter-ga,' for instance; because all such comprehensive notions presuppose diversity, not unity, of what is included under those notions. 
( 
4 
Nor can the fact of the Word being actually recognised as the same in all cases be explained on the basis of mere Similarity. Hence, on the ground of this Recognition, Word should be re- garded as Eternal. The Recognition is a form of Perception,'- being brought about by the Sense-organ as aided by the Impres- sion left by a previous impression; what it perceives and appre- kends is the present object as qualified by the identity of the same object as remembered. For these reasons the Word must be regarded as Eternal. And the reason for this lies in the fact that the Word heard today is actually recognised as the same that was heard yesterday; and that when there is utterance, it only serves to manifest the existing Word, it does not create or produce it. Hence Word cannot be a product or Effect. Not being an Effect, it cannot be perishable. And, continuing to exist in its own form, and not being perishable, it must be Eternal.—(Shästra- dipika, p. 112-125.) 
SENTENCE AND ITS MEANING. 
Words are Eternal; what is denoted by them is Eternal, the relation between these two is Eternal. But the question remains- How does the Sentence express its meaning? This is the most 
152 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
important question; because the only right knowledge of Dharma that we can obtain is from the Vedic text, and this text is always in the form of a Sentence. 
The view of the opposite party is that there can be no reason- able basis for the expression of its meaning by the Sentence,- or that it must be based entirely upon Convention; and as, accord- ing to the Mimāmsaka, there can be no maker of Convention in regard to Vedic Sentences, the Veda must be regarded as un- relable: or, in the last resort, the Veda should be regarded as the work of a trustworthy author, and its validity must be dependent upon the reliability of that author. That this is the most reason- able view is shown by the fact that in all our experience Sentences always emanate from human beings. It might be that in matters relating to Dharma, no Person can be regarded as an infalliable source of knowledge. But in that case the only reseasonable conclusion is that no reliability can belong to the Sentences found in the Veda, and the Veda, therefore, cannot be regarded as an infallible guide.—(Shāstradīpikā, pp. 126-127.) 
• 
The Mimamsaka's answer to the above is that the basis of the meaning of the Sentence lies in the meanings of the Words composing that Sentence; each of these words denotes its own meanings, and these Word-meanings indicate the meaning of the Sentence. For example, in the Sentence Bring the cow,' the Word bring' directly denotes the act of bringing in general; and it indirectly indicates the particular act of bringnig pertain- ing to the time. The word 'cow' also directly denotes Universal Cow'; and it indirectly indicates the individual Cow as the objective related to the act of bringing. Thus in every Sentence, each of the component words directly denotes its own meaning in the general form and indirectly indicates it as related to the meaning of the other words. (This is what is called the Abhihi- tānvaya-vāda,-—the Theory of the Verbal Expression of Connection between what is denoted). 
Thus the meaning of the Sentence is based upon the mean- ings of its component words; it is not baseless; nor is it based upon Convention. Hence the Vedic Injunction cannot be an unreliable source of knowledge regarding Dharma. 
Then there remains the alternative view that the Veda may be the work of a trustworthy Person. In support of this view 
CHAPTER XV: VERBAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO KUMARILA 153 
C 
there is the following argument-" The Vedas must be the work of a Person, because it consists of Sentences, like all such works, e.g., the Mahabharata." This same conclusion is supported by the presence of such designations as Kathaka' and the rest, which are applied to the Veda. The Author of a work is that person who of his own free choice brings together words in the form of Sentences." 
The Mimamsaka's answer to the above is as follows:-If there were an Author, the Composer, of the Veda, he should certainly have been remembered through the long line of tradi- tion; as we find in the case of Buddha who is known as the author and propagater of the Buddhist Scriptures. There could be no chance of such an Author being forgotten; because the religious performances of all men would be based upon the authority of his name; specially as the Effectiveness of those performances could not be known from any other source. As a matter of fact, how- ever, we find that people have no idea of any such Author of the Tedu. Hence the non-rememberance of one who should have been remembered if he had existed leads to the conclusion that such an Author should be regarded to be as non-existent,- just like the Horns of the Hare. Even those persons who believe in the idea of the Veda being the work of an Author are not able to point definitely to any such person as being such an Author: they have very vague ideas about the matter; for ins- tance, some of them regard the Veda to be the work of others attribute it to Hiranyagarbha '; others again to pati.' All these divergent notions could not be correct if people had a definite idea of the Person who composed the Veda; as they have in regard to the Mahabharata or the Smptis of Manu and others. As regards the persoal names-' Kathaka' and the like- · being applied to the Vedas,-there is the simple explanation that these names are based upon the fact of such Vedas or portions of the Veda having had such persons as their most efficient Expoun- ders. From all this we conclude that the Vedas are not the work of a Personal Author; and being thus free from any defects due to such authorship, the Vedas must be regarded as the only source of knowledge (relating to Dharma). which is infallible in its Self- Sufficient Validity. (Shastradipika, pp. 131-132.) 
F. 20 
f 
C 
C 
God '; 
Prajā- 
CHAPTER XVI 
UPAMANA-ANALOGICAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO SHABARA 
Upamana, Analogy,-which consists in Similitude-also brings about the Cognition of things not in contact with the Sense-organs. For instance, the sight of the Gavaya, which is an animal resembling the Cow, brings about the Remembrance of the Cow, (as something similar to the animal before the eyes). (Shabara, Trs., p. 15.) 
According to the Rjurimala what is meant by the Bhasya is that the sight of the Garaya brings about the Analogical Cogni- tion, that "the animal seen is called Garaya", to the man who had known the Cow. 
This view of Upamana has been contested in the Shloka- Tārtika. 
C 
The difference in the two interpretations turns upon the exact signification of the term gosmaranasya.' According to the Bhatta view, the term is to be construed as gosmaranasya buddhimutpādayati,i.e., it (the Similitude) produces the idea (buddhi) of the Remembrance (smarana) of the Cow (goh); while according to the Prabhakara (Br., p. 107), the term maraṇasya' is to be construed as anubhutagoḥ puruṣasya', 
to the man who had known the Cow.' (See below.) 
ANALOGICAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA. 
C 
gos- 
Upamana-Similitude-also brings about the Cognition of the unseen thing;-for instance, when a man already knowing the Cow sees the Gavaya-the perception of the Gavaya brings about the Cognition of the unseen (cow), through Similitude, Upamana; i.e., the Smilitude brings about the Cognition of an- other thing (Cow), which is not before the eyes, but which bears similarity to the Gavaya before the Eyes. (Br., p. 107.) 
On this, the Rjurimalā (p. 107)-The direct meaning of the Bhasya, by which the Similitude would be the cause of the Re- membrance of the Cow, cannot be right: as in the case in question, 
154 
CHAPTER XVI: ANALOGICAL COGNITION 
155 
the Cognition, buddhi', that is brought about is, not of the Remembrance of the Cow' (go-smaraṇasya), but of Similarity (of the known Cow) 
Sādṛshyajñānagrāhyam -sādṛshyam 
It is Similarity that forms the object apprehended by the Idea of Similarity (Upamāna)'-(Ṛjuvimalā, p. 109). That is, ‘When one perceives the Similarity, and this perception of Simi- larity brings about the Cognition of Similarity in regard to the (unseen) correlative, this is what is called Upamāna, Analogical Cognition.' (Rr. VI, p. 109.) 
Against this, it has been argued that—“ There would appear to be no objective of such Analogical Cognition; the man has previously seen the Cow,-he perceives the Similarity to that Cow in the Garaya before his eyes. Now what is left which could form the objective of the Analogical Cognition in question?" 
The answer to this is that, in the case of Inference we have found, even in the case of something already known through one Means of Cognition, that if it comes to be cognised by another Means of Cognition, it is regarded as the Objective of the latter Cognition. This is all the more reasonable in the present case where the Similarity of the Gavaya in the Cow is something that has not yet been cognised at all; and it is this Similarity of the Gavaya in the Cow (this Gavaya is similar to the known Cow') which forms the objective of-is made known by-the Similarity of the Cow in the Gavaya.—(Bṛhati and Ṛjuvimalā, p. 109.) 
This Analogical Cognition cannot be regarded as Perception, as it is the Cognition pertaining to something not in contact with the senses; the cow, for instance, is not before the eyes.-Nor is it mere Remembrance; because at the time that the Cow was seen in the past, the Gavaya had not been seen, and hence at that time. the Similitude could not have been seen and noticed, and what has not been seen cannot be remembered. Nor lastly can it be regarded as Inference (says the Brhati, p. 108); because what brings about an Inferential Cognition is a Relationship (or con- comitance) that has been perceived several times;-and another essential factor in Inference is that the Indicative Reason must be one entirely free from any such relationship with the contrary of the Probandum; so that Analogical Cognition pre- sents none of the factors that are essential in Inferential Cognition. 
156 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
ANALOGICAL COGNITION ACCORDING TO KUMARILA. 
According to Kumarila what happens in the case of Analo- gical Cognition is this-The observer already knows a certain. object, for instance, the animal Cow,-then on going to the woods, he sees another animal, which, he perceives, resembles, is, similar to, an animal already known to him,-thereupon there is recalled to his mind the formerly perceived Cow which he cognises now as Similar to the animal before his eyes; so that what forms the objective of Analogical Cognition is the remembered Cow as qualified by similarity to the seen animal,-or, the Similarity as qualified by the previously known animal.-Though it is true that the Similarity is perceived while the Cow is remembered, yet the two together-i.e., the Cow-cum Similarity to the seen animal -are not cognised, either by Perception or by Remembrance; and hence, for the Cognition of the two together we need a dis- tinct Means of Cognition; and Upamana, Analogy, is such a dis- tinct Means of Cognition. Just as in the case of Inference, the Hill is perceived and the Fire is only remembered (as Concomi- tant with Smoke), for the Cognition of the two together-the Fire and the Hill-there is need of a distinct Means of Cognition, in the shape of Inference. In cases where the idea of Similarity is misconceived, wrong,-the Resultant Analogical Cognition is wrong,-based upon false Analogy. This Analogical Cognition cannot be regarded as the same as Inference; because the factors. necessary for Inference are not present in the case of Analogical Cognition. (Shlokavārtika, Upamāma, 37-43.) 
The resultant idea is in the form- The Cow I had seen on the previous occasion is similar to this animal that I see now,' says the Shastradīpikā (p. 52). 
CHAPTER XVII 
ARTHAPATTI-PRESUMPTION 
ACCORDING TO SHABARA, 
Presumption consists in the presuming of something not seen, on the ground that a fact already seen or heard of cannot be explained without that presumption. For instance, it is found that Devadatta, who is alive, is not in the house, and this Non- Existene in the House leads to the Presumption that he is some- where outside the house; as without this, the aforesaid fact of his being alire and not in the House could not be explained. (Bhasya, Trs., p. 16.) 
PRESUMPTION-ACCORDING TO PRABHAKARA. 
6 
C 
What cannot be explained without the Presumption--is Non-Existence outside' along with 'Non-Existence in the house' (which latter is directly perceived). Hence, the perception of Non-Existence in the House becomes the source of Inexplicability of the man's Eristence (ie., being alive) without the recognition of the connection of that Existence with outside. This in- explicability consists in contrariness (inconsistency) to other Means of Right Cognition. The process is as follows:--(a) First of all there is Perception of the fact that the Man is not in the House--(b) so long as the connection of the Man's Eristence with outside is not duly known,--the fact of his being in eristence (alive), though well-known, becomes uncertain, open to doubt. The Man not being in the House, is he alive at all?" and (c) the Existence, thus rendered doubtful, is finally cog- nised as connected with outside. Thus what is inexplicable is the Man's Existence (being alive); and this becomes explained by his existence outside, which thus forms the objective of the 
Presumptive Cognition.-(juvimalā, pp. 112-113.) 
Though the Bhasya has mentioned only two forms of Cogni- tions Seen or Heard of-yet what is meant is whatever may be a fact duly ascertained through any of the Means of Right Cog- nition. So that the expession Seen or Heard' is an idiomatic one which is used in the sense of Well-known '; such is the well- established usage. 
157168 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
This appears to be in anticipation of Kumārila's view, by which Seen' stands for what is well-ascertained through all the six Means of Cognition (Perception, Inference, Analogical Cog- nition, Verbal Cognition, Presumption and Negation), and he finds a special purpose in the separate mention of the Heard ' fact. (Shlo. Va., Presumption, 1-2) where we read:- 
प्रमाणग्राहिणीत्वेन यस्मात् पूर्वविलक्षरणा 
" 
C 
[ yazar aufufa: ] 
according to which the Presumption based upon Verbal Cognition is in the form of Words, i.e., the words He eats at night.' This is contested in detail by the juvimalā, pp. 115–117,-according to which what is presumed is the fact of the man eating at night, not the Verbal Cognition that he eats at night.' 
KUMARILA'S VIEW OF PRESUMPTION. 
The above explanation of the process of Presumption is not accepted by the Bhatta. He demurs specially to what has been said regarding the Element of Doubt. He argues that in the example cited, if the man's Existence (being alive) were at all doubtful, it could not afford a sound basis for the requisite Pre- sumption; it is only when the Man's Existence is known with certainty that it can warrant the presumption of his being out. Further, the doubt regarding the man's existence could be set aside only by the certain Cognition of his Existence (in general) —not necessarily by the certain Cognition of his Existence out- side (Shāstradīpikā, pp. 53-54). According to the Bhatta, the basis of Presumption lies, not in Doubt, but in mental irreconcila- bility or inconsistency between two well-ascertained facts; which inconsistency is removed by the Cognition of a third fact; and it is this last Cognition that constitutes Presumption. (Ibid., p. 55-There is no inconsistency between well-ascertained facts in the case of Inference, and it is in this, according to the Bhatta, that lies the difference betwen Inference and Presumption. 
The Shlokavārtika (Chapter on Presumption) supplies the following definition of Presumption : —(1) 'When a fact ascertained by any of the six Means of Cognition is found to be inexplicable except on the basis of a fact not so ascertained,- the assumption of this latter fact is what constitutes Presumption.' 
CHAPTER XVII: PRESUMPTION 
159 
(1) An example of Presumption based upon a perceived fact we have in the presuming of the Burning Capacity in Fire, which is based on the perceived fact that it burns. (2) An example of Presumption based upon an inferred fact, we have in the pre- suming of the Moving Capacity in the Sun, which is based upon the inferred fact that the Sun moves from place to place. (3) An example of Presumption based upon analogically cognised fact we have in the presuming of the Cognisability of the Cow by the Cognition born of the Similarity between the Cow and the Garaya. (4) An example of Presumption based upon Presumption is found in the Cognition of the denotative potency of the Word through Presumption based upon the well-known fact that it denotes cer- tain things, and on the basis of the said presumed Denotative Potency-which cannot be otherwise explained,-we presume the Eternality of the Word. (5) An. example of Presumption based upon Negation or Non-Apprehension we have in the case where the non-apprehension of Devadatta leads to the Presumption of his being outside. (Shlo. Va., Presumption 3-8). This last cannot be included under Inference (Ibid., 9--50). (6) An example of Presumption on the basis of a Verbally Cognised (Heard of) Fact, we have in the following case:-When one hears the assertion So and so is fat and yet he eats not during the day,' he is led to the Presumption that the man eats at night' (Ibid., 51). 
In regard to the exart form of this last kind of Presumption, there is a difference of opinion: Some people hold that the Presumption is of the fact of the man eating at night, while according to others, the Presumption is of the Verbal Assertion that he eats at night. (Ibid.--52). All are agreed in regarding this sixth form of Presumption as not entirely different from Agama, Verbal Cognition. (Ibid. 52). And the reason for this view lies in the fact that all cognitions derived from the Vedic text belong to this category; and all these would be Non-Vedic,' 'Non-Scriptural,' if this Presumption were entirely different from Verbal Cognition. (53.) Though the Presumption in question has the character of Verbal Cognition,-being expressed by means of the Words He eats at night,'-yet what we have to consider is the sanction behind this Verbal Assertion. This sanction can- not be held to be provided by Perception, because the presumed assertion is not actually heard: nor by Inference; as no connection 
" 
160 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
of the two has been observed; (pp. 53-60). Nor can the requisite sanction be derived from another Verbal Expression, (72);-nor from Analogical Cognition (74). Thus the only sanc- tion-proof, means of Cognition-for Cognition derived from the heard words He eats not during the day '-lies in Presumption only (76). 
Such is the conclusion of the philosophers who hold that what is presumed in this case is the Verbal Assertion ('He eats at night'), not the fact of his eating at night. That is, the assertion that 'He eats at night' is presumed from the inconsistency and inexplicability involved in the assertion that 'Being fat, he eats not during the day' (Nyayaratnākara on 76). 
This is followed in the Shlo. Va. by a long discussion from the point of view-that what is presumed is the fact of eating at night, not the assertion' He eats at night.' And Kumarila comes to this conclusion that as a matter of fact, all Conceptual (Determinate) Cognition is accompanied and preceded by Verbal Cognition, and that in the case in question, as soon as the Verbal Expression he eats at night' appears, the inconsistency involv ed in the previous assertion (Being fat, he eats not during the day') disappears; and there is no further inconsistency left which could serve as the basis of the presumption of the fact as apart from the words expressing it. (Shlo. Va., Presumption, 78.) 
CHAPTER XVIII 
ABHAVA-NON-APPREHENSION 
C 
(ACCORDING TO SHABARA) 
Abhava,' Non-apprehension,' stands for the non-existence -absence of all the five Means of Cognition described above; and this brings about the Cognition in the form- It does not exist in regard to things not in contact with the senses. That is, (explains Kumarila, (in Shlo. Va. Abhara 1) in a case where Sense-perception and the other Means of Cognition are not found to be effectively operative towards bringing about the notion of the Existence of a certain thing, we have the notion of the non- eristence of that thing; and the means by which this notion of non-existence is got at is called Abhava, Non-apprehension.' -(Shabara-Bhasya, Trs., p. 16.) 
NON-APPREHENSION 
ACCORDING TO PRABILĀKARA, 
Having quoted the words of the Bhasya, the Bṛhati puts the question-" Is this the definition of a Means of Cognition ?"- The answer from the Mimamsaka (other than Prabhakara) is- Yes; and what is cognised through it is that a certain thing does not exist (as declared in the Bhasya). This answer is rejected by the 'Acharyo' (says the Rjuvimalā, p. 119) in the following words: -What is said to be cognised is not actually cognised. The Definition too is given in the words- Pramāṇābhāva,' 'the absence of Means of Cognition ';—and this definition clearly implies that what is proposed to be defined is not a Means of Cognition. It is true that the idea current among Mimamsakas is that this, Abhava,' is the sixth Means of Cognition. But there is no reasonable basis for this idea. There is nothing that can form the objective of this Means of Cognition; NOT can it have the Character of a real Means of Cognition. And yet, with all this, it has been introduced here in the present context; the 
161 
- 
C 
F. 21 
162 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
" 
reason for which lies in the fact that, treating of the subject of the Means of Cognition, and having dealt with the five Means of Cognition, we add that what is not cognised by any of these five Means is what is cognised through this Sixth Means, called Abhāra.' But this does not make this Abhava a regular Means of Cognition, because a Means of Cognition can be regarded as really so only when it brings about its Effect, in the shape of the definite Cognition of its objective; and this definite Cognition is always in the form of this,' which implies ecclusion of all other things. Hence, when no such Effect appears as the Effect of the Means of Cognition-people have the idea this does not exist.' This being sufficient to account for the idea of the 'Non-Existence' of things, and it being wrong to regard as Means of Cognition what does not bring about a definite Cognition,-any defining of such a source of knowledge as a Means of Cognition must be regarded as childish prattle. As regards the idea being current among Mimāmsakas, it has to be rejected as an idea without suffi- cient basis. Thus we conclude that what the Bhasya says is only by way of Supplement to the definition of the other Means of Cognition, and it is not meant to be the definition of a distinct Means of Cognition in the shape of Abhāva. 
C 
What 
Thus the view held by Prabhakara and his followers may be summed up as follows:-Cognitions of things are of two kinds- in one kind we cognise the thing as along with some other thing, and in another kind, we cognise the thing by itself alone; and this latter Cognition is apprehended in terms of things that are not there, and which, if present, would have been cognised. we really have, in the latter case, is only the non-apprehension of something that would have been apprehended if it had been there; hence, the Negative Cognition can be nothing more than the Cognition of the one thing in terms of those other things which are not apprehended, and which, if present, would have been apprehended. Thus in the case of the conception The Jar is not here,' all that is meant is that- Even though the Jar would have been perceived if it had been here, what we perceive is the bare place'; and this is an ordinary positive Cognition, pure Perception in this case. In this way it can be shown that there is nothing that could be cognised through Abhava,' Non- Apprehension, which therefore cannot be regarded as a Means of Cognition. (Brhati-Ṛjuvimala, p. 118 et seq.) 
C 
CHAPTER XVIII: NON-APPREHENSION 
ABHAVA-NON-APPREHENSION 
ACCORDING TO KUMARILA, 
163 
When the first five Means of Cognition do not function to- wards bringing about the Cognition of the Existence of a certain object, then there comes to function that (Sixth) Means of Cog- nition which is known as "Abhawa' Non-Apprehension,' Negation. (Shlo, Va., Abhāra, 1.) It is through this Means of Cognition that the gon-existence of things becomes cognised.- (Ibid., 2.) 
( 
Abhava is of four kinds: (1) the previous Non-Existence; e.g., the Non-Existence of the Curd and other milk-products in the (fresh) milk, (2) Non-Existence by Destruction; e.g., the Non- Existence of the milk in milk-products, (3) Mutual Non-Existence; e.g., the negation of the Cow in the Horse and vice versa and (4) Absolute Non-Existence; e.g., the Non-Existence of horns on the head of the ass, which is found to be devoid of any hard and enlarged protuberances on the head.--Under the circumstances, if Abhara were not a Means of Cognition, then, there might be rogni- tion-(1) of Curd in Milk, (2) of Milk in Curd, (3) of Cloth in the Jar, (4) of Horns in the Ass, of Intelligence in Earth and other material Substances,-of bodily shape in the Soul, of Odour in Water, of Taste in Fire,---of Colour, Taste and Odour in Air -of Tangibility in Ãkāsha.-All this Diversity could not be a mere non-entity, mere Negation. Hence, they must be regarded as real Entities, Fastu.' Another reason why all this Abhava should be regarded as Entity lies in the fact that it is capable of being apprehended by inclusive as well as exclusive Cognitions, which means that it is an object of Cognition, Prameya, (Ibid., 2-9). The notion that a certain thing does not exist is not possible without some sort of a comprehensive notion of things' (16). 
C 
C 
C 
C 
The Non-functioning of the Means of Cognition' stands for the non-appearance of Sense-perception and the other Means of Cognition (11)-For instance, the said notion, that a certain thing 'does not exist,' cannot be brought about by Sense-organs, because the Sense-organ can have contact only with a positive factor. What happens in the cases of Cognition that the Jar does not exist is that the observer perceives the positive entity in the shape of the Place, and then remembers the counter-entity which 
C 
164 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
would have been seen (the Jar for instance, if it were there),- and there follows the Cognition of its being non-existent; and this latter is a purely mental Cognition, which comes indepen- dently of the functioning of the Sense-organs. 
the Sense-organs. What brings about the Cognition of Non-Existence is not the mere non-percep- tion of the Object, but that non-perception of the object which should have been perceived, had it existed. (27.) Nor can the Cognition of Non-Existence be brought about by Inference; because there is no perception of the Inferential Indicative and the other factors necessary for Inference (29). Thus the Non- Eristence (Negation, Abhiru) being what is cognised, the Means by which this Non-Existence is cognised-its Pramāņa-also con- sists in Abhara, Negation; and this negative Means of Cognition is not operative towards positive Entities,-in the same manner as the positive Means of Cognition (Perception and the rest) are not operative towards Negative Entities. Nor is there any Royal Command that the Means of Cognition must be positive (45-47). 
The purpose of postulating this as a distinct Means of Cog- nition lies in the fact that the mixing up of things can be avoided only by the Cognition of the fact of one thing not being another, and this Cognition can be obtained only through the instrumentality of Abhava; so in matters relating to Sacrificial Performances, that the details laid down in connection with one set of Sacrifices are not the same as those laid down in connection with another set, can be known only through Abhava, Negation; so also the fact that a certain detail does not belong to a particular sacrifice can be known only by the absence or Negation of the Vedic Injunction to that effect. 
OTHER MEANS OF COGNITION 
Shabara does not mention any other Means of Cognition apart from the above Six-Perception, Inference, Word, Analogy, Pre- sumption and Negation (Non-Apprehension). 
Prabhakara also does not mention any other. 
4 
Kumarila notices a few others; but adds that these are not independent Means of Cognition. He mentions (1) Sambhava,' Probability, whereby, it has been held, we cognise the presence of a Hundred in a Thousand; he explains, however, that it is in- cluded under Inference,' being based upon the inseparable rela- 
CHAPTER XVIII: NON-APPREHENSION 
165 
tionship (Invariable Concomitance) between 100 and 1000. (2) Similarly, Aitihya', Rumour or Tradition, which has been re- garded as a distinct Means of Cognition by some people,—is in most cases, not true; and when it is true, it comes under 'Word,' Trustworthy Assertion.-(Shlo. Vā., Abhāva, 57-58.) 
Some people have postulated Pratibhā,' Intuition, as a distinct Means of Cognition; but Intuitional Cognition-such as that appearing in the form of the premonition of certain events, -does not always turn out to be true. Hence, no reliance can be 
placed on the assertion of the Taishesikas that Sages and Mystics have the Intuitional Cognition of Dharma-Adharma. (Shastra- dipika, p. 65.) 
CHAPTER XIX 
MIMAMSA TOPICS PROPER 
(A) INTRODUCTORY-SHASTRĀRAMBIA. 
We have so far confined our attention to the preliminary study of those topics of philosophical interest that bear upon the consideration of Mimamsa-topics proper. Now we turn our atten- tion to the study of these Mīmāmsā topics themselves. The former study has shown us who is the Moral Agent for whose benefit all this study is carried on,-in what way this study will benefit him, and what is the ultimate Goal to which the proper performance of his duty will lead him,-what are the Sources and Means of Knowledge, which of these can help the Agent to obtain the Knowledge of what his duty is and in what way it is to be per- formed. We have seen that the conclusion is that the Veda is the only Source and Means of Knowledge which can provide one with the right knowledge of Duty, in both its positive and nega- tive aspects-that is, What should be done and what should not be done. 
The proper study and the understanding of the Veda, there- fore, becomes necessary for every intelligent and responsible person. Unless he has an intelligent conception of what his duty is, he cannot regulate his action rightly. 
This study of the Veda, according to the Mimamsaka, is re- served for the three Higher Castes only; other people therefore have to depend upon the Brahmana for the exposition of what their Duty is; teaching being the function. 
function reserved for the Brāhmaṇa alone, among the Higher Castes.' 
< 
Now, this study of the Veda itself is a Dharma, a duty; and as such it must have been enjoined as such in the Veda itself. Hence, the Mīmāṁsaka makes it his business to explain that this proper study of the Veda--for the special purpose of securing the Knowledge of what should be done and what should not be done, -is actually enjoined in the Veda. This therefore forms the 
166 
CHAPTER XIX: (A)-SHASTRARAMBHA 
167 
first Topic of Study, technically Adhikarana,' of the Mimamsa- Shastra. 
The method adopted by the Mimämsä-Shastra as embodied in Jaimini's Sūtra in the study of each topic is to deal with it in five parts (1) the explanation of the occasion that gives rise to the necessity of investigation of the topic concerned, (2) the subject- matter of the topic, represented in most cases, by a Vedic text, (3) the grounds of doubt or uncertainty which necessitate the in- vestigation, (4) the Prima Facie View called the Purrapakṣa,' on the question and (5) the Finally Established View, cal'ed "Siddhanta.' 
C 
In regard to this first Topic, the occasion has been presented by the 'first Sutra of Jaimini, which declares Next therefore comes the enquiry into Dharma'; and the question arises-What does the term 'Next' exactly mean? It connotes Sequence, we know; but Sequence to what? The Sequence meant is that to the reading of the Veda, and this with reference to that particular kind of inquiry into Dharma which is not possible without the reading of the Veda. But the reason for this lies in the fact that in the course of the Inquiry, there will be various kinds of discussion over Vedic texts, and until we have studied the Vedic texts themselves there can be no discussion over them. It is not meant that there can be no Inquiry into Dharma before the Read- ing of the Veda, or that the Inquiry is to follow immediately after the Reading of the Veda. 
In fact, on the completion of the Reading of the Veda, there are two courses open to the Student; he may return home from the Teacher's House immediately after the Final Bath (Graduation), or he may continue to re- main there even after the Bath' (Graduation) as a Post- graduate Student and carry on investigations and researches in- to the Subject-matter of the Veda-relating specially to Dharma. And the advice conveyed by the opening Sutra is that One should continue to remain at the Teacher's Residence and carry on in- vestigations into Pharma.' The questions to be investigated are 
C 
1 
C 
(1) What is Dharma? (2) By what is Dharma indicated or made known to us? (3) What are the right Means of accomplish- ing Dharma? (4) What are the wrong Means of accomplishing Dharma? (5) What is the need or purpose of Dharma?-Of these, questions (a) and (b) have been dealt with under Su. 2 and168 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
the remaining questions have been dealt with in the rest of the Sutras.(Shabara-Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 1-3.) 
We proceed now to put all these ideas into the technical form 
C 
of the Adhikarana' described above. 
(1) The occasion is presented by the completion by the Student of the Reading of the Vedic Texts. 
(2) The Fișaya, or Subject-matter, of the Topic is provided by the Vedic text-Svāddyāyaḥ adhyētaryah. (The Veda should be studied,' according to Kumārila),--or Aṣṭararşam brāhmaṇam upanayiła tam adhyāpayīta (One should initiate the eight-year-old Brahmana and teach him, according to Prabhakara). [For a full statement and discussion of this differ- ence of opinion, between Kumarila and Prabhākara, see below.] 
(3) The doubt or question that arises in regard to the said text is-Does it enjoin the reading of the Verbal Text only, of the Veda? Or does the Injunction include the Investigation of the Meaning of those Vedic Texts also? 
(4) The Prima Facie View (Pūrvapakṣa) is that the Injunc- tion does not include the Investigation of the Meaning of the Vedic texts; whence it follows that there is no justifiacation for the propounding of the Mimamsa-Shastra, which deals entirely with that Investigation. 
C 
(5) The Finally Established View, Siddhanta, is that In- vestigation is included in the Injunction of Vedic Study; and hence the Investigation of the meaning of the Vedic texts is as much enjoined as the Reading of the Vedic Texts themselves. 
We shal digress a little to discuss at some length the difference of opinion between Prabhakara and Kumārila in regard to the particular text that enjoins and prompts the said Investi- gation,-i.e., the Visaya vakya, the basic text, on which the whole Adhikarana rests. 
< 
C 
Shabara does not quote any particular text, he only speaks in a general way of Vedadhyayana,' Vedic Study,' under Sū. 1; but from what he says under Su. 6.1.35 (p. 625, Bib. Ind. text), his words seem to favour the Prabhakara view.-With reference to the question of the Shudra's title to the performance of Vedic Sacrifices, he says-" What is laid down in the text referring to Upanayana is the acquiring of the title of Acharya,' by the 
CHAPTER XIX: (A)—SHĀSTRĀRAMBHA 
C 
C 
C 
169 
Investigator; that this is so, follows from the Atmanepada ending in the Injunctive word Upanayita, which clearly shows that the root'ni' here denotes the acquiring of the title of Acharya '; 
and from this it follows that what prompts the act of Initiation (Upanayana) is the desire to acquire the title of Acharya;' from this it is clear that it is only the Brahmana, the Kṣattriya and the Vaishya who are connected with the learning of the Veda (as Upanayana is prescribed for these three castes only). (Shabara Bhu., Trs., p. 1000.) 
" 
C 
THE PRABULĀKARA VIEW. 
4 
The Prabhakara takes for his basic text the injunction- Aṣṭararṣam brāhmaṇam upanayita tamadhyāpayita (One should initiate the eight-year-old Brahmana and should teach him '); where the two injunctive words panayita' and Adhyāpayita' have the Atmane pada-ending, which indicates that the fruit of the action enjoined accrues to the Nominative Agent; so that the result that follows from the acts of initiating and teaching should accrue to the man who does the Initiating and Teaching. The only result that can accrue to him is the acquiring of the title of Acharya (Teacher). This is made clear from the words of Manu (2. 140). 
4 
उपनीय तु यः शिष्यं वेदमध्यापयेद् द्विज: । 
सकल्पं सरहस्यं च तमाचार्य प्रचचते ॥ 
|| 
"The Brahmana who, having initiated the Disciple, teaches him the Veda along with the Ritualistic Details and the Esoteric Explanations,-him they call the Acharya. (See above, from Shabara on C.1.35. Trs., p. 1069.) Thus the motive desire lead- ing to the Study and Investigation is on the part of the Teacher- not on the part of the Disciple. The Teacher teaches, for the purpose of obtaining for himself the title and honours of the Acharya, Teacher; and as there can be no traching and no teacher without some one to be taught, he has to take to himself (Upa-ni) a Disciple; but the latter cannot be a true Disciple or Student unless he is made to Study;' this act of Studying by the Disciple becomes implied by the above two texts; and as Study cannot be carried on without the help of a Teacher, the one implies the other. 
The Injunction of Vedic Study is thus implied in the Injunction 
F. 22 
170 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
of taking a pupil (Upanayana)-for the purpose of obtaining the title and honours of the Teacher' so that it becomes necessary to find out a motive for this Study on, the part of the Pupil; for whom the purpose of the Teacher cannot supply the requisite motive. This motive, for the Pupil, lies in the comprehending of what is taught in the Vedic texts studied; and as this comprehension cannot be secured without due reflection and pondering of the Vedic texts,- the Investigation embodied in the Mimamsa-Shastra becomes justified. (Prakarana-pañchika, pp. 5-12, See also Bṛhati, p. 7.) 
The above explanation of the initial motive for Vedic Study carried on by the Teacher and his pupil provides a perceptible motive.-in the shape of the Title and Honours-and thus avoids the necessity of having to assume an imperceptible transcendental result following (to the Student) from the said Vedic Study,-says Bṛhati (p. 13). 
One other reason that lies behind the Prabhakara view is that it is only thus that, like the work of Teaching, the work of Investigation also becomes restricted to the Brahmana only; as it is the Brahmana alone who can teach and hence can aspire to the title and honours of the Acharya. 
THE BHATTA VIEW, 
This Prabhakara view has been contested in Parashara- mādhava, pp. 36-39, where it is pointed out that Teaching and Officiating at Sacrifices have been prescribed for the Brāhmaṇa, only as a means of livelihood, and hence are purely voluntary; while Study and Sacrifice are compulsory duties; the Injunctions of these latter therefore occupy a much higher position than, and must be distinct from, the Injunction of what is to be done for the acquiring of the title and honours of the 'Acharya.” 
C 
In view of this and other reasons, the Bhatta takes as his basic text the words Srādhyāyo’dhyēta vyaḥ '-(The Veda should be studied ). Though later writers like Madharacharya object to this text on the ground that it occurs in the Injunction of the five Mahayajñas necessary for he Householder, and hence cannot be taken as the basis for the Initial Study (by the Regligious Student on his Upanayana-Initiation). They therefore propose a basic Vedic text inferred from the Smrti Injunction of Vedic Study. (Shastradipika, p. 4.) 
CHAPTER XIX: (A)—SHÄSTRARAMBILA 
171 
The Bhatta position is thus set forth in the Shastradīpikā (pp. 2-8): 
C 
The basic text is Svadhyayodhyētaryaḥ (The Veda should be studied). The question is-Does this text lay down the Study of the Veda as a Duty, the performance of which brings about a transcendental result, in the shape of Heaven or some such thing? Or does it lay down the Study for the purpose of reading and understanding the Veda? In the former case, the Injunction would have been fulfilled by the getting up of the mere Verbal Text of the Veda, and there would he no need for proceeding with it any further, and investigating the meaning of the texts; while under the latter case, as the said Investigation would be necessary for the understanding of the meaning of the Vedic texts, such Investigation also would be included under the Injunction, which would thus be an Injunction of the said Investigation also. 
The Prima Facie View is that-" The necessity for under- standing the meaning would be felt and recognised even without the Injunction of it; hence, the Investigation into the. Meaning need not be sought to be included under the Injunction of Tedic Study; as the said Investigation would be serving a perceptible purpose it would not need to be enjoined. The conclu- sion, therefore, is that the Injunction of Vedic Study enjoins the learning of the verbal feat only, as leading to a transcendental result; and the Injunction having been carried out by such study alone, the Student should leave the Teacher's Residence forthwith, and he need not prolong his pupilage for the purpose of carrying on the Investigation into the meaning of the Vedic texts.” 
The Final Conclusion is as follows:-The purpose served by the Injunction of Vedic Study is to restrict such Study to the three higher castes alone. That is, if this Injunction of Reading the Veda' were not there the texts dealing with the Agnihotra and other acts would come to pertain to any one who had the requisite knowledge of the texts,-irrespectively of his caste; when, however, the Injunction of Vedic Study is there, the title to the performance of the said acts becomes restricted to the three higher castes; because it is only the three castes for whom Initiation has been enjoined in such texts as The Brahmana is to be initiated during the Spring, the Kattriya during the 
4 
172 
PURVA-MIMÄMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
Summer and the Vaishya during the Autumn;' as persons thus initiated are not told what they should do after being thus ini- tiated, there comes the Injunction of Vedic Study', which how- ever does not specify the person who is to do it-now these two sets of texts, taken together, supply us with the idea that the boys of the three higher castes who have been initiated should study and get up the verbal text of the Veda and then carrying on its study, should proceed with the work of Research and In- vestigation and thereby obtain the idea of what is taught in the Veda. Thus it is that the Initiation becomes a part and parcel of Vedic Study,' by preparing the Person who is to carry on the fruitful Study of the Veda. Thus Vedic Study serves the perceptible purpose of comprehending the meaning of the Veda, and this comprehension leads on to the useful purpose of the due performance of the acts prescribed in the Veda; hence, the entire process becomes fruitful.-From all this it follows that after Vedic Study, one should proceed with the Investigation into the meaning of the Vedic texts. 
(B) WHAT IS DITARMA? 
It has been established that it is necessary to study the Verbal text of the Veda and to carry on researches and investiga- tions for the purpose of learning what is taught in the Veda. 
The question might arise-" The Sutra started with the statement of its purpose as Investigation of Dharma; while the Bhasya and all other commentators have gone into the question as to whether the Student is to retire after the getting up of the Verbal text of the Veda, or he is to continue to reside with the Teacher and proceed with the work of Investigation as 
to the meaning of the Veda. What is the connection between the The Invstigation into Dharma' and the Study and investigation of Veda and its meaning '?" 
4 
4 
4 
The first point to be considered is-What is the Dharma which has to be investigated; and the second point-What is the Means whereby the Right Knowledge of Dharma can be obtained? (1) The above is the Gecasion for the question arising;- (2) the Subject-matter is the Definition of Dharma and the Means of Knowing it; (3) The doubt is-Is it possible to define Dharma und to know what it is? 
CHAPTER XIX: (B)-WILAT IS DILARMA 
173 
(4) The Prima Facie View is that "Dharma, being something beyond the ken of men, cannot be defined and for the same reason there can be no valid means of knowing it." 
(5) The Final Established View is-Even though Dharma is something beyond the ken of men, yet it is possible to define it and also to find a means of knowing it. This right definition has been provided by Jaimini in Sūtra (2) as― That which is indi- eated by the Vedic Injunction as conducive to welfare',-.e., it is what is enjoined in the Veda and is conducive to desirable results. 'Dharma' thus, in this context, does not stand for the merit that is obtained by the doing of good deed, by right conduct (which is the ordinary connotation of the term); it is used in the much wider sense of what should be done, i.e., Duty. This same definition of Dharma also supplies the answer to the second ques- tion, regarding the Means of Knowing Dharma, on which point the conclusion is that the Vedic Injunction is the only Means of knwing Dharma: that is, a right knowledge of Dharma can be obtained only from the Veda. This also implies that the Veda is a valid means of the knowledge of Dharma. Thus there are three conclusions involved—(1) Dharma is what is enjoined in the Veda as conducive to welfare, (2) the Veda is the only source of the knowledge of Dharma, and (3) the Veda is a reliable source of knowledge. 
This is Kumarila's presentation of the Topic. According to Prabhakara, it is as follows: 
(1) It has been established that the Investigation into Dharma should come after the Study of the whole Veda; now, when the said Investigation proceeds, the question presents itself How much of the meaning of the Veda' is to be investigated? (2) The Subject-matter of this Topic is the meaning of the Veda as providing the right knowledge of Dharma.--(3) The doubt on this question is-Is the meaning of the entire Veda-all Vedic texts, including Injunctions enjoining actions, as well as the descriptions of things, Mantras and Descriptive Passages, to be investigated as the Means of knowing Dharma? Or only the Injunctive texts, laying down something to be done? (4) The Prima facie view is that the meaning of the entire body of Vedic texts should be investigated.-(5) The Finally Established View is that the meaning of only those Vedic texts has to Le investigated 
174 
PURVA-MIMÄMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
which are injunctive; because it is only the Sentence laying down something to be done that is really directly expressive; and as such it is only such a Sentence that can be the Means of a valid Verbal Cognition. This is what has led the Prabhakara to deviate from the ordinary presentation of the Adhikarana. This is in accordance with the Anvitabhidhana Theory of Verbal Expression, of which Prabhakara is the propounder (see above),- according to which we can construe a Sentence and find out its meaning only when it contains some sort of an Injunction of Something to be Done. 
C 
L 
It may be noted that the actual words used in the Sutra lend support to Prabhakara's view. It speaks of Chodana' as the Means of knowing Dharma; and Chodana' is Injunction. The Bhagya also has clearly declared that the word, Chodana" stands for the Sentence that enjoins an act क्रियायाः प्रवर्तकं वचनम् and Pra- bhākara (Bṛhati, p. 20) at once fastens upon this declaration of the Bhasya and remarks that this clearly asserts that the validity of the Veda as the Means of right knowledge pertains to something to be done. Says the Rinimali-- What is made known by the Chodana is only an act, something to be done, or things connect- ed with that act; but not any accomplished thing? (P. 20.) Kumārila (Shlo. Và., Sũ. 2, 7) asserts that the term Chodană has been used in the sense of all Words in general; and on this the Nyayaratnākara adds- The Chodana is the means of know- ing Dharma; as a matter of fact all Words are the means of valid verbal Cognition, and the Chodana is a Word; hence, it can cer- tainly provide the right knowledge of even supersensuous things like Dharma.' 
4 
(C) RELIABILITY OF THE VEDA. 
(1) That the Veda alone is the source of knowledge of Dharma has been established; (2) what is to be considered now is the neces- sity or otherwise of the examination of the trustworthy character of the Veda-(3) The doubt or question that has to be solved is- Should the reliability of the Veda be examined or not?-(4) The Prima Facic View is that there is no need for any such examina- tion of the character of the Means of Cognition; all that is neces- sary to know is that is is a Means of Cognition that does bring about the knowledge of Dharma; and this has been already learnt. under the preceding Topic.-(5) The Finally Established View is 
CHAPTER XIX: (D)-SENSE-PERCEPTION, ETC,, NOT APPLICABLE 175 
that the said examination is essential; specially for the Wimamsi- Shastra, which makes it its business to enquire into all matters. relating to Dharma; and the trustworthy characetr of the Veda as the declared Means of Knowledge, and how far and why reli- ance is to be placed upon it--has to be fully examined before full reliance can be reposed upon it. 
According to Prabhūkara the question dealt with under Sü. 3 (embodying Topic is whether it would not be the right order of procedure,—after having established the fact of the Veda being the means of knowing Dharma-to ascertain what is contained in the Veda, (which has been done under Discource II et seq.)- rather than proceed with an enquiry as to the validity and re- liability of the Veda. The former of these alternatives is the Prima Facie View. The Final Conclusion is that, when it comes to Action, then certainly what is declared in the Veda as to be done becomes of prime importance; but when we are carrying on an enquiry into the nature of Dharma and the Means of knowing it, our first business is to ascertain how far our source of knowledge is valid and can be relied upon as it is only when this has been done that we can be sure as to what it is that is actually mentioned in the Veda and should be done. Another reason for taking up this point first lies in the fact that the validity of a Means of knowledge is inherent in itself, and as such independent of every- thing else; whereas, whether a certain act is, or is not, enjoined by a certain text, depends upon the trustworthy character of that text itself. (Rjurimalā) 
(D) SENSE-PERCEPTION, INFERENCE, ETC., DISCUSSED, 
(1) Before dealing with the leda as the reliable Means of knowing Pharma, it is found nccessary to dispose of the other well- recognised Means of Knowledge,--such as Sense-perception, In- ference, Analogy, Verbal Cognition, Presumption and Non- apprehension--which might be regarded, in some quarters, HIS affording all the Means that is necessary for the knowledge of Pharma.-(2) The Subject-matter of this Topic then is the relia- bility of Sense-perception and the rest as reliable means of know- ing Pharma.-(3) The doubt or question is-Is the knowledge of Dharma brought about by the Vedic Injunction only? Or also by Sense-perception and the other well-known Means of Cognition? 
(4) The Prima facie View is that Sense-perception and the 
176 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
rest are as good Means of Knowledge as the Vedic Injunction; hence, Sense-pere: ption and the rest also can bring about the re- quisite knowledge of Pharma.--(5) The Finally Established View is as follows: As a matter of fact, Sense-perception is operative only in regard to such things as are present and in contact with the Sense-organs; Dharma however is not anything existing at present, nor is it possible for it to be in contact with any Sense- organ; hence, though Dharma is an object of Cognition, it is in- capable of being cognised through Sense-perception. And when it is entirely beyond the reach of Sense-perception, the other Means of Cognition--Inference, Analogy and Presumption,--can- not be applicable to it; as these latter are more or less based upon Sense-perception. As for Inference, Analogy and Presump- tion-these also presuppose and are based upon Sense-perception, hence, these also cannot be the Means of knowing Dharma," says Shabara (Trs., p. 8). All those other Means of Knowledge are based upon facts and factors cognised through Sense-percep- tion. Hence, the conclusion is that Dharma cannot be known through Sense-perception, Inference, Analogy or Presumption. 
(E) VEDIC INJUNCTION THE ONLY RELIABLE MEANS OF KNOWING DHARMA, 
(1) It having been decided what is not the Means of know- ing Dharma, it becomes necessary to consider what is such Means. -(2) Of the five well-known Means of Cognition-Perception, Inference, Analogy, Presumption and Scriptural Word,-the first four have been rejected; as regards the fifth, it has been shown that the knowledge of Dharma can be derived from Word only in the form of the Vedic Injunction. The reliability of the Vedic Injunction thus is what we are to consider now.-(3) The question is-Is the Vedic Injunction reliable as a Means of knowing Pharma?-(4) The Prima Facie view is that Word cannot be a reliable Means of knowing Dharma; because the reliability and expressiveness of the Word is dependent upon the knowledge of its expressive potency, which is obtainable only from Convention, and this Convention can be learnt only from popular usage;-. while Dharma is beyond the range of ordinary popular conception ; -hence, it is impossible to conceive of any Convention bearing upon Dharma;—hence, Word cannot be the Means of knowing what Dharma is:and what is true regarding Word in general is 
CHAPTER XIX: (F) VEDIC INJUNCTION RELIABLE 
177 
truer still in regard to the Veda and the Vedic Injunction.-(5) The Finally Established Conclusion is that the Expessiveness of the Word is not dependent upon Convention, as the relationship be- tween the Word and what it denotes is inborn, eternal, without beginning or end; hence, in expressing its meaning the Word is self-sufficient; it is infalliable also,-in the form of the Vedic 
Injunction, in which case there is no possibility of any source of mistake. (See above, Section on Verbal or Scriptural Cognition) 
(F) THE VEDIC INJUNCTION ALWAYS RELIABLE, 
(1) It has been proved that the Veda is the only Means of knowing Dharma; it becomes necessary to show that the validity and the reliability of the Veda is free from all defects and defi- ciencies; and to this end, it has been shown that the relation between the Word and its meaning is eternal, not artificial or created by Conventions. For this purpose it is essential that the eternality of the Word also should be considered. (2) The Word, as the Means of Knowing Dharma, is thus the subject-matter of this Topic. (3) The question is-Is the Word, in the form of Injunction, eternal or non-eternal?-(4) The Prima Facie View is that Word-Sounds are found to be evanescent, hence, Word must be evanescent, non-eternal.--(5) The Finally Established View is that Letters as well as Words are Eternal, as is vouched for by Recognition, which is never found to be sublated; what is regard- ed as the production of the Word, is only its manifestation. This View is insisted upon because unless this is accepted there can be 
confidence in the Word. (See above-Section on 
no 
Cognition.) 
( 
(G) THE SENTENCE 
Terbal 
IS AS RELIABLE AS THE 'WORD'. 
(1) It has been established that the Word and its Relation to its Meaning are both eternal; the Vedic Injunction however- which has been declared to be the means of knowing Dharma,-is not a Word, it is a Sentence, an aggregate of several words; hence, it has to be considered if the Sentence is expressive in the same way as the lord,-and if the relation of the Injunctive Sentence with its meaning is also eternal. (2) The reliability of the In- junctive Sentence thus is the subject-matter of Inquiry.-(3) The question is-Is the Vedic Injunction—which is a Sentence-a re- liable means of knowledge or not?-(4) The Prima Facie View is 
F, 23178 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
that the Injunctive Sentence cannot be reliable; because it is not independent in its expressiveness-being dependent upon the con- nection among its component factors.-(5) The Finally Establish- ed View is that the Sentence expresses nothing more than what is expressed by the component Words; heace, the Expressiveness of the Sentence is as independent and self-sufficient as that of the Words; so that there is no room for any doubt rgarding the re- liability of the Vedic Sentence a a right means of knowing Dharma. (See Section on Verbal Cognition.) 
(H) VEDA, NOT THE WORK OF A PERSONAL AUTHOR. 
C 
(1) It has been established that the Veda is a reliable Means of knowing Dharma; but if the Veda is the work of a personal author,-like other literary documents-then it is as liable to error, on account of the imperfections of that author, as the words. of common people; so that no reliance could be placed upon the words of the Veda; it becomes necessary to prove, therefore, that the Veda is not the work of any author, it is eternal and self- sufficient, and hence, there is no possibility of any unreliability in it due to the defects of the Author.-(2) The reliability of the Veda is the subject-matter here also,-(3) The question is-Is, or, is not, the Veda the work of an Author?-(4) The Prima Facie View is that portions of the Veda are named after certain persons, -such names are found for instance, Kāṭhaka ', ' Kālāpaka' and so forth; from which it is clear that, like these sections, the entire Veda is the work of certain persons.--(5) The Finally Establish- ed Conclusion is as follows:-The names cited indicate, not authorship but mere expounding; so that the persons indicated are those who have been specially expert expounders of those sections of the Veda. As a matter of fact, we do not know of any author of the Veda; there is no tradition on the point; if there had been any author, he would have been surely known. Hence, the Veda cannot be regarded as the work of an author; and being free from such authorship, it must be free from unreliability due to such authorship; hence, it becomes established that the Vedic Injunction is a reliable means of knowing Dharma. 
Thus the whole of Discourse I is taken up in the establishing of the two main propositions propounded in Su. 2-viz., that (1) the Veda is the only Means of Knowing Dharma, and (2) that the Veda is entirely reliable and authoritative, 
CHAPTER XX 
4 
EXTENT AND CONTENT OF THE VEDA' 
MANTRA AND BRAHMANA. 
C 
We have seen that the Veda is the only reliable Source of knowledge regarding Dharma. The work known as the Veda' an unequal work,-it is a collection of Mantras and Brāhmaṇas.' 
is 
* 
C 
The question to be considered now is-Are all these many Vedic terts- Mantras as well as Brahmanas to be regarded as a reliable source of knowledge regarding Dharma? Or are we to pick and choose among them? (Shabara-Bha., Trs., p. 24.) 
(A) MANTRAS. 
Before taking up the main question however we have to see what Mantras and Brahmanas' 
Brāhmaṇas 
4 
C 
J 
C 
are. 
Of Mantras no formal definition has been attempted by the earlier writers. Later writers, however, have defined it as the Karaya, Instrument, of offering; but this definition is too wide; as the Substances offered, the Implements used and such other sacrificial accessories are all as much instruments of offering as the Mantras. It is for this reason that the more logical writers on Mimaṁsā have contented themselves with explaining Mantra as a name applied to those Vedic texts that are expressive of mere Assertion (as distinguished from Injunc- tion)' (Mi. Su., 2.1.32); that is, those texts which express mere assertion, which only assert, and do not enjoin any act; nor do they serve the purpose of commending acts;-it is only to such texts that learned men apply the name of Mantra.'-This defini- tion, however, is only illustrative; as there are certain well- recognised Mantras which do not make an assertion; c.g., Vasan- tāya kapiñjalānālabhēta' (Vāja. 
(Vāja. Sam., 24.20), which has been accepted as a Mantra. Even so, Some sort of a general definition has been propounded here, in order to avoid having to point to every individual Mantra-text. (Shabara, Trs., 202.) 
-- 
179 
180 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
This is what has led Kumārila to remark that- This defini- tion has been provided here for the sake of its terseness, specially because it is in this sense that the name is used among teachers and students and other experienced people, and also because it is applicable to almost all Mantras.'-(Tantrvārtika, Trs., p. 570.) 
This has been still further simplified by the Shastradīpikā (p. 207) What is meant is that that is a Mantra to which the name is applied by the learned.' 
6 
C 
Prabhakara has offered the following explanation (Bṛhati, MS., p. 50B)-In the Veda some Sentences are Mantras and some Brāhmaṇas; those to which the learned apply the name Mantra' are Mantras; while all the rest of the Veda are Brahmanas, to which they apply the name lidhi' also;-the Arthavadas (Declamatory Sentences) and Nāmadhēyas (Names) are also in- cluded under the Brahmanas; though this name Brāhmaṇa ' is applied strictly to the Vidhi or Injunctive texts only, the De- clamatory texts and the Names are also included under that name by reason of their always subserving, in some way or the other, the Injunction along with which they are construed. 
4 
6 
C 
(B) CLASSIFICATION OF MANTRAS. 
Mantras have been classified under three heads:-(1) Rk, (2) Saman and (3) Yajus. On these three names the Brhati (MS., p. 50B) remarks as follows:- The words Rk, Saman and Yajuș are found to be used in connection with the Vedas; hence, it becomes necessary to ascertain what part of the Veda is Rk, what part l'ajuş and what part Saman; on this point our conclusion is that the name Rk is applied to those texts that are divided into feet,' i.e., into certain well-defined parts, each part containing a definite number of syllables-and are called on that account by such prosodial names as Gayatri, Triṣṭubh, etc. 
The clear line of distinction between the Mantra and the Brahmana is that the Mantra is that Vedic text which merely makes an assertion (Su., 2.1.32), while all the rest of the Veda under the name 'Brahmana says Su., 2.1.33. The Veda consisting of Mantras and Brahmanas', and Mantras being 
comes 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
C 
181 
those texts that are merely assertive, it follows that all the rest of the Veda falls under the head Brahmaṇa '; hence, no defini- tion of the Brāhmaṇa' has been provided. (Shabara, Trs, p. 204.) 
८ 
(C) MANTRAS ARE NOT INJUNCTIVE. 
That Mantras are not injunctive has been declared under S., 2.1.31. The Established Conclusion set forth under the Sutra is that the Mantra can be expressive of mere assertion, as it functions only during the performance of an act'; that is, it is only while the Sacrifice is being performed that the Mantra functions; if it enjoined the act, its functioning would come before the com- mencement of the performance. (Shabara-Bha., Trs., pp. 200- 201.) 
Kumarila has demurred to this conclusion. According to him these Sutras, 2.1.31 and 30 do not bear upon Mantras at all, all that they mean to point out is that the functioning of the verb lies not only in Enjoining, but in asserting also. His argument is that it is not true to say that the verb, when it occurs in a Brāhmaṇa-text, serves to enjoin an act, while the same verb when occurring in the Mantra-text, ceases to be injunctive. Nor is there any reason to regard the Mantra is subsidiary to the Brāhmaṇa, and not rice-versa. That is, there is no special reason whereby it could be ascertained that it is the Mantra which has its injunctive potency suppressed by reason of the act in question having been already enjoined in the Brahmaya-text,--and not rice-versa. Both the Mantra and the Brahmana therefore should be regarded as equally injunctive; and the Non-injunctiveness of Mantras can- not be regarded as well-established. Nor is there any incongruity in the Mantra serving both the purposes-of enjoining acts and of recalling things enjoined elsewhere (Tantravārtika, Trs., pp. 566-567.) 
Kumārila (Tantravārtika, Trs., pp. 568-569) has drawn the following distinction between the Mantra and the Brahmana:- In the case of the Brahmana-text, if its injunctiveness is found to be suppressed by some such reason as the requisite Enjoining having been already done elsewhere, and such other grounds, then the verb is taken as pointing out something else which affords the occasion for another action; and in this case the mere verbal form 
182 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
of the text is not regarded as capable of being used at the per- formance. In the case of the Mantra, on the other hand, as soon as we learn its form, we at once realise that even the merely verbal form serves the useful purpose of recalling things; and hence we come to the conclusion that it is the actual words of the Mantra that are to be used at the performance, specially because at performances it is necessary that there should be such recalling of certain things. This recalling can be done only by such Mantra-terts as perform no other function. Consequently, when in a certain context, it is found 
found that there are certain Mantra-tects mentioned which do not serve this purpose,-and which are taken along with an Injunctive-text with the vague notion that some useful purpose might be served by them,—we conclude that these Mantras are to be used as serving the purpose of merely asserting things. 
to 
Prabhakara's view is more in keeping with the Bhaṣya: From the very nature of the Mantras it is clear that they cannot be injunctive; because as a rule, they are devoid of the Injunctive Word; also all Mantras are found to be construable,-either by direct syntactical connection or by indirect implication-with other texts which are clearly injunctive. Nor are Mantras found contain any Commendation or Condemnation; hence, they cannot be regarded as Arthavada, Declamatory. With all this, however, Mantras cannot be regarded as entirely meaningless or baseless; forming an integral part of the Veda, they must serve some use- ful purpose; they must have some meaning, expressing something that is needful in the acts prescribed by the Injunctive texts. 
This question of Mantras being expressive, and not entirely meaningless has been dealt with by Jaimini under Su., 1.2.31- 53. (Shabara-Trs., pp. 74-86). It has been shown that they are not injunctive and they are not Commendatory or Condemna- tory. It has been shown that they serve the only purpose of asserting things and recalling them to the Mind.-But before this can be admitted, it has to be seen if the Mantra-texts are meant to be expressive, to convey a meaning at all. Because they could do the asserting or the recalling only if they expressed any mean- ing at all. It is necessary to discuss this because, if the Mantra- texts of the Veda are not meant to be expressive, they cannot convey any information regarding Dharma, and this would vitiate 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
183 
the authority of the Veda.-The Purvapakṣa view is that the Mantra-texts are meant only to be repeated in their verbal form, they are not intended to convey any meaning; and this for the following reasons:-(a) Because there are separate injunctive texts laying down the use of the Mantras; this would not be neces- sary if the Mantra itself expressed any meaning, as in that case the use of the Mantra would be indicated by that meaning itself;- (b) because the exact order of the words of the Mantra is insisted upon; this would not be necessary if any significance were attached to the meaning of the texts,-as any change in the order of the words would not affect the meaning;-(e) because they speak of things that do not exist;-(d) because the meaning is not always intelligible for these reasons Mantras cannot be regarded as conveying any meaning. The Final Conclusion is that being Sentences, like any ordinary Sentence, the Mantra-terts should be regarded to be as exp.essive as any other sentence. In cases where the meaning is not intelligible, it is not that there is no meaning; it is there always, only people are ignorant of it. There are certain Brāhmaṇa-terts also which already point to the expressive character of Mantras. (Shabara-Bha., Trs., pp. 74- 
86.) 
- 
Being expressive, and serving the purpose of asserting and recalling things in connection with the acts enjoined by the In- junctive texts, Mantras are clearly helpful in providing the knowledge of Dharma. Only those Mantra-terls which are not found to serve such purposes are to be used at the performances in their purely verbal form; and even so they serve a distinctly useful purpose in relation to what is Dharma, 
According to Murári Mishra, the question relating to Mantras is-Do they help the Act by their utterance only, or through expressing something useful in relation to the Act to be doue; and the Siddhanta, he says, is as stated in the Nibandhana'; he does not specify which work he means by this title; but it is clear that he means the Bṛhati; as his statement of the Parrapakṣa is in greater accord with that than with the Tantravārtika.-He 
says- 
सकलदेशनाप्रामाण्याक्षेपेणैव पूर्वपक्ष: । 
In this connection, Murāri criticises the view of Chandra, an old writer on Purvamimāṁsā, 
184 
PURVA-MIMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
Mantras have been classed under three heads-(1) Rk, (2) Yajuş, (3) Saman. These have been defined under Sutras 2.1.25 et. seq. 
All these three are found mentioned in the Taittiriya Brāhmaṇa 1.2.1.26. 
1 
C 
C 
C 
The R has been defined (2.1.35) as that where there is divi- sion into feet,' on the basis of meaning. That is, that Mantra is called Rk where there is division into feet '; e.g., (1) Kētuṁ kṛṇvannakēta vē—(2) pesho maryā apeshase—-(3) samuṣadbhirajāya- thah (R.V., 1.6.3.) That the division into feet should be on the basis of the meaning is not meant to be emphasised. For if it were, then the name Rk. would not be applicable to those texts where the division into feet' is on the basis of metre, not of meaning. The exact definition of the Rk therefore is only that it 
it is that 
that Mantra where there is division into" feet'. (Shabara, Trs., p. 207) 
" 
C 
" 
The name Saman' is applied to the music-says Su., 2.1.36. The particular music to which a Mantra is set is called Saman”; it is only when a Mantra is set to music and so 
sung that it is called Saman.' In this matter, the teaching of the learned is our sole authority. So when the termSaman is applied to Mantras set to music, the name stands for the music to which the Mantra (RK) has been set; and the name is applied to the Mantra itself only indirectly through its connection with that music. (Shabara, Trs., p. 208.) 
C 
Under Su. 7.2.1-21; (Shabara, Trs., pp. 1252, etc.) also we are told that the various Saman-names- Rathantara' etc.- should be taken as denoting music. That this is so is shown by the fact that the name Rathantara-Saman' is applied also to cases where there is no basic verse at all (Su. 14); e.g., we have the text-He sings the Prajapati-hṛdaya without a verse.' In fact, these particular names are applied on the basis of the difference in the modulations (Su. 16)-The Final Conclusion thus is that the term Saman' (and its varieties, Rathantara' etc.) stand for the music (not for the words or texts).-(Shabara, Trs., p. 1265.) 
C 
C 
The same conclusion is more clearly reiterated under Sû. 9.2.1 et seq. where the Bhaṣya (p. 1493) says From all this it follows that the name Saman applies to Music only, not to the Mantra-text set to music,' Under Su. 3 (p. 1496) we are told 
CÍAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
185 
that the Saman is only an Embellishment of the words that are sung, because the singing (which is Saman) cannot be a primary act, as it subserves the purpose of the words (Su. 6); i.e., the Saman (music) is clearly perceived to be something helpful to the words. 
Samans have been divided into several kinds-Rathantara, Bṛhat, Vairupa, Vairāja, Shakrara, Raivata and so forth. They have been described in Mimāṁsābāla prakāsha. This division appears to be based upon the different methods of singing; e.g., the Bṛhat-Saman is to be sung with force and very loudly, while the Rathantara is sung not loudly, nor with force (Mi. Su., 9.2.46). 
It would follow from this that the Saman should not be treated as a kind of Mantra or Rk. 
On this point Kumarila remarks as follows (Tantravartika, Trs., p. 579).—The Saman, being sung and being a qualification, and the Mantra-text being the qualified, the word Saman denotes the Sung Mantra or Mantra set to music in the same way as the word Cow' denotes the Class Cow qualified by the Individual; in this same sense the qualifying factor-the music- is said to be denoted by the word Saman. 
C 
C 
If the Suman is only the music, and is only an Embellishment, —that is, brought about by the Singer,-to that extent it cannot be eternal, and hence cannot be regarded as Veda proper, which is independent of all sources, human or divine. For instance, the syllable ha hau' and the like which are introduced by the Singer into the Mantra through the exigencies of music, are always variable, being dependent upon the Singer, who may or may not introduce a certain syllable or set of syllables. Says Shabara on Su., 9.2.29 (Trs., p. 1521)-Singing is an act; it gives expression to particular sound-notes produced by the volitional effort of man,-for the purposes of securing the required Music; it becomes necessary to have recourse to (a) Modifications of the Syllables contained in the Mantra-text, (b) to Disjunction, (c) to Withdrawal, (d) to Repetition, (e) to Pause, (f) to Breaks and so forth. What therefore is due to the effort of man cannot be eternal. 
In the case of all Mantras, whenever they are recited in praise of something, they must be set to music and sung in the Saman- 
F. 24 
186 
PURVA-MIMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
form; as the Praise is always more pleasing when it is sung than when it is merely recited. This has been declared under Su. 9.2.31 (Shabara). 
C 
" 
The name Yajuş is applied to the rest of the Mantras- says Sū. 2,1.37; on this the Bhasya says:-It is not necessary to pro- pound a definition of Tajus, the third kind of Mantra, because by the process of elimination, the nature of the l'ajus would be understood from the definitions of Rk, and Saman; i.e., that Mantra which is not set to Music and wherein there is no division into feet, is lajus; i.e., the whole of it is one continuous sentence. -(Shabara, Trs., p. 209.) 
4 
There is another name met with in this connection- 'Nigada.' It has been given to Mantras that are in the form of address or praise. They may 
They may be considered to belong to a separate class, because they have been mentioned separately in the text The R is to be recited loudly, the Saman is sung loudly, the Yojus is recited softly; and the Nigada is recited loudly.' In other ways it is similar to Yajus,-but the injunc- tion that it is to be sung loudly differentiates it from the Yajus which is sung softly.The conclusion on this question is that the Nigada is to be classed as Yajus' because it has the same mixed and continuous form as the Fajus; and like the Yajus, the Nigada also is 'different from Rk and Saman.' As regards the different method of reciting it, that is due to the fact of its being addressed to other persons; which serves a distinctly useful purpose. If the Nigada were uttered softly, like the Yajus, it could not be heard by other persons and hence it could not convey any idea to them. It is for this reason that it has to be recited in a differest manner. Thus, then Nigadas may be defined as those Yajus-Mantras that are pronounced loudly. The different name also is for the purpose of indicating this peculiarity. The name Nigada can- not apply to Rk-Mantros, as there is a text which clearly men- tions the two (Ṛk and Nigada) separately- Ayājā vai nigadāḥ, rchaiva yajanti.' The very name Nigada' indicates that it is prose (Gadya), while the Rk is metrical.-(Shabaru-Trs., pp. 210 212). 
C 
C 
3 
The word Prstha' is sometimes used to signify the Rgveda. Under Su. 7.3.36 (Shabara, Trs., p. 1298), it is asserted that the term stands for the Substance, i.e., for the words of the Ṛk-verses. 
4 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
C 
187 
Again on page 1299- The term 'Prstha' stands for the Mantras '; -and again, The term Prstha' stands for the Mantra-tert.' 
18); (h) Directory, 
C 
- 
C 
C 
C 
C 
- 
The Bhasya (on Su. 2.1.32; Trs., pp. 202-203) has noted a few details regarding the characteristic features of the different kinds of Mantra,-(a) Those ending in asi '—' Mēdho'si';— (b) Ending in ‘tvā'—'Iṣẽ tvā' (Vīja. Saṁ. 1. 1);—(c) Well-wish- ing;—' Āyurdā asi, etc.' (T. S., 1.6.6.1); (d) Eulogistic-' Agni- rmürdha, etc.' (T. S., 4.4.4.1); (e) Expressive of Number, Eko mama, etc.' (Sh. Br., 1.5.5.12); (f) Incoherent talk,-'Akşi te indra, etc.'; (g) Bewailing Ambe ambikë ambalike, etc.' (Vāja. S. 23. 
Agnidagnin vihara' Agnīdagnin vihara' (T. S., 6.3.2);— (2) Searching, Ko'si katano'si, etc.' (V. S., 7.29);-() Ques- tioning, Prchchhāmi tvā, etc.' (T. S., 23, 61);-() Descrip- tive,-Iyam vēdiḥ, etc.' (V. S., 23. 62);— (7) Elliptical Exten- sion,- Achchhidrēņa pavitrēņa, etc. (V. S., 4.4);-(m) Per- formance, Trais varyam, etc.'; (n) Capability,-i.e., power of expression. All this, indicated by the Vṛttikára is only illustra- tive, not exhaustive. There are, for instance, several Mantras which have the word asi' in the middle and not at the end; e.g., Idyashchasi vandyashcha vājin' (V. S., 29. 3); also some having 'tra' in the middle; e.g., Tat tvāyāmi.' Then again amongst Brāhmaṇa-texts also, we find (a) Well-wishing texts; So’kāma- yata prajāḥ sṛjēya.'—(b) Eulogistic texts also are found among the Brahmana-texts,- Vayurvai kṣēpiṣṭhā dēvatā' (T. S., 2.1.1.1); also Incoherent texts Na chaitad vidmo brāhmaṇā vā, etc.' (Mait. S., 1.4.11); also Rewailing-Ye manadhukṣanta, etc.'; Directory, Amutaḥ somamāhara,' Searching—‘ Tha ra sa iha cũ, etc.';-Questioning- Veda karanaratim, etc.' Answer- Vidmo vā, etc.';-Elliptical Extension- Hṛdayasyāgrē' radyati atha jihrāyāḥ, etc.';-Performance, Trais varyam, etc.'; Capacity,- * Sruvēṇāvadyati, etc.';-Thus the description supplied by the Vrittikara is neither inclusive of all Mantras, nor exclusive of all Non-Mantras. 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
The above classification of Mantras into Ṛk, Yajus and Saman is the main one. There is also another classification based upon the diversity in the character of the significance, of accentuation and so forth. This classification is applicable to the Rk and Yajuş Mantras. Of the Rk there are 273 kinds and of the latter 50. These have been described and exemplified by Shankara Bhatta in his Mīmānsā-bāla-prakāsha, pp. 58-70,188 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Mantras have also been classified according to their metre. This classification pertains to the Rk Mantras only. The follow- ing are the principal metres:- 
(1) Gayatri-24 Syllables-9 Subdivisions. (2) Ushnik-28 Syllables-7 Subdivisions. (3) Anustubh-32 Syllables-7 Subdivisions. (4) Bṛhati-36 Syllables-9 Subdivisions. (5) Pankti 40 Syllables-8 Subdivisions. (6) Tristubh-44 Syllables-10 Subdivisions. 
(7) Jagati 48 Syllables-3 Subdivisions. 
(8) Atijagati 52 Syllables. (9) Shakvari-56 Syllables. (10) Atishakvari-60 Syllables. 
(11) Aști-64 Syllables. 
(12) Atyaṣṭi-68 Syllables. 
(13) Dhṛti-72 Syllables. 
(14) Atidhṛti-76 Syllables. 
Of these the Gayatri, Triṣṭubh and Jagati are mentioned in Shatapatha-Brahmana, 1.2.2.6; 3.4.22; 3.4.4.8; and 4.1.1.8; and others are mentioned in 8.2.2.6. 
For further details about Metre, see Mimamsābālaprakasha, pp. 56-70. 
From the very definitions of the Rk and Yajus it would follow that there can be no metre in the Yajuş Mantras. But Pingala in his Chhandah-Sutra has declared that there are metres in these also. That this is a later innovation is indicated by the fact that true Vedic authority is not accepted by many old writers (Karka among others) to belong to those Yajus Mantras that are distinguished and characterised by metres;-and that even those who accept the authority of those Mantras (e.g., Devayājñika) assert that there is no metre in many Yajuș Mantras on account of the syllables in them not being fixed. Herein may be found an orthodox authority for the view propounded by some people that the metrical portions of the Yajurveda are comparatively modern. 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
189 
Among Mantras there arises one difficulty which has been anticipated and provided for by Jaimini (2.1.46-48). In regard to Mantras that appear in the metrical form.e., Rk-or those set to musie-i.e., Saman,—there is not much difficulty in ascer- taining how far a certain Mantra-tert extends, as the termination of the text is made clear by the metre or by the music. But in the case of the Mantra-teats-in Prose-i.e., Yajus and Nigada, it is sometimes difficult to ascertain how far a certain Mantra extends. It is in view of this difficulty that certain Principles or Laws of Interpretation have been laid down. These are-(1) Ekurākyōdhi- karana-What constitutes One Sentence 'The Principle of Syntactical Unit (2.1.46)-(2) Vakyabhēdādhikarana- What constitutes different Sentences? 'The Principle of Syntactical Split (2.1.47); and (3) the Anuşan gādhikaraṇa— How an incom- plete Sentence may be completed 'The Principle of Elliptical Extension. (2.1.48). We shall deal with these in some detail, as they play an important part in the whole science of Mimāṁsā and serve a directly useful purpose in all textual interpretation. 
C 
(1) PRINCIPLE OF SYNTACTICAL UNIT 
EKAVAKYADHIKARAṆA' 
This principle has been thus enunciated in Su. 2.1.46-So long as a single purpose is served by a number of words, which, on being separated, are found to be wanting and incapable of effect- ing the said purpose, they form one Syntactical Unit-one com- plete Yajus-Mantra'. 
This form in which it is stated in the Sutra naturally apper- tains to Mantras in the form of Yajus. Hence, the following explanation in the Bhasya:- One Yajus-Mantra extends to that extent up to which the words serve the purpose of indicating things helpful to the act of sacrifice; to that extent it is one Syntactical Unit. This is what is meant by the words of the Sutra- So long as a purpose is served by a number of words.' Therefore it comes to this that a group of words serving a single purpose, forms one Sentence, but only if any one of these words, on being disjoined from the rest makes it wanting or defective. We have an example of this in the case of the Yajus- Mantra Devasya tra savituḥ prasave, etc.' (T. S., 1.1.4.2).,, The assertion in the Sutra is to be explained and justified as meaning the fulfilling of a single purpose. For instance, the 
190 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
said Mantra serves the single purpose of indicating the act of Nirrāpa (offering), and hence, the words are taken as one sentence. (Shabara, Trs., pp. 213-214.) 
C 
Thus according to the Bhasya, the Principle is meant to be applicable to Vedic words only, in the form of Yajuş-Mantra. It must be so if the term Arthaikatvät in the Sutra is taken as it is by the Bhasya-in the sense of serving a single purpose; this purpose being something in connection with the sacrificial per- formance. That this is so is made still clearer by what is said in connection with the next Principle of Vakyabhēda, Syntac- tical Split'. Prabhakara, in keeping with the Bhasya, explains 
Arthaikatvat' as serving the purpose of indicating or reminding of what is to be done; he distinctly says that- the term 'Artha' stands for Prayojana, purpose, as the purpose is the most impor- tant factor and the words of the 'Sentence' must be related to that important factor.' (Brhati MS., p. 51.) 
C 
C 
Even before Kumārila's time, however, it was felt that this Principle was capable of a much more extended application, and in the Tantravārtika (Trs., p. 583) we find an objector urging the argument that the conditions stated in the Sūtra are more easily recognised when applied to ordinary Sentences, than in those of the Vedic Mantras. Kumārila's work contains such statements as- It must be concluded that those words on hearing which we are clearly cognisant of a single idea must be regarded as one Sentence, and it is only this definition that is found compatible with the character of every single sentence-either ordinary, or of the Mantra and Brāhmaṇa' (Tantra-va., Trs., p. 586). And yet so far as the opinion of the Bhasya is concerned, we find Kumārila declaring The Bhāṣya explains, the words of the Sūtra as that collection of words which is employed as one whole, at a sacrifice, is one Yajus.' (Tantra-vi., Trs., p. 587)-andi again (p. 589) The reply given by the Bhasya is based mainly upon the fact that the wordArtha' is taken in the sense of Purpose (and not in that of Idea or Meaning). 
C 
Thus we find Kumarila accepting the explanation of the Bhāṣya which restricts the Principle in question to Vedic texts of the Yajuș class only, and yet he is inclined to attach to it a wider signification. And we find among his followers, Pārthāraṭhi Mishra favouring the restricted application according 
" 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
191 
to the Bhasya by taking Artha in the sense of Purpose, while Someshvara Bhatta takes the word in the sense of Idea and thus admits the wider scope of the Principle. 
The Brhati (MS., p. 52A) says The comprehension of the Mantra is dependent upon its prescribed use. The meaning and purpose of the Mantra therefore can be learnt from something apart from itself, and its extent can be ascertained from the metre. The present Sutra lays down the extent of the Mantra. The term Artha' in the Sutra stands for Meaning as well as Purpose; both being inter-related; but of the two, purpose is the predominant. factor; that is why it has been emphasised by the author of the Bhāṣya. 
arc 
(2) Vakyabheda-Principle of Syntactical Split-Distinct Sentences. Says the Sudra (2.1.47)--When the sentences equally independent of one another they should be treated as dis- 
tinct sentences. 
4 
C 
On this the Bhāṣya (Trs., pp. 216-217)-In connection with such Mantra-texts as Ayuryajñēna kalpatām prano yajñēna kalpatām (T. S., 1.7.2.1.), there arises the question-Are the two sentences to be taken as One Sentence a single Syntactical Unit', or as two distinct Sentences? The established conclusion is that such set of words which stands independently by itself and does not stand in syntactical need of another set of words, should be treated as a distinct sentence; so that the two sets of words-(1) Ayuryajñena kalpatām' and 'Prāņo yajūēna kalpatām'--should be treated as two distinct sentences. 
What is meant by this is that when a number of words are found to be such that when taken by themselves severally, each, independently of others, is equally capable of expressing one complete idea (or of serving one purpose),-each should be regarded as a distinct Sentence. 
This Principle applies, not only to cases where the actual words of the Mantra-texts are found to be so construable, but also to those cases where, even though the actual words of the text are not so separately construable by themselves, yet such construction is rendered possible and permissible by virtue of certain words of the related Brahmana-text bearing upon the use of the Mantra- tert in question. For example, we have the Mantra-text 'Iṣe teā ürje tra, etc.' (Vājas, S. 1.'.); where the various parts of the 
192 
C 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
4 
text as they stand are not found to be construable independently as so many different Sentences; but in the Brahmana-text (Shata- patha-1.1.66; 1.7.1.2; 4.3.1.1.7) bearing upon this Mantra we read-Iṣe ten iti shakhanchhinatti-With the words Iṣe tvā, one cuts the branch and so on, with the other parts of the Mantra-tert-on the authority of these injunctions contained in the Brahmana-texts, it becomes necessary to add to the words of the Mantra-terts, the words 'Shākhām chhinadmi (I am cutting the branch'); and with these additional words this supplied, each of the several parts of the Mantra-tert becomes a complete Sen- feace, expressing a complete Idea-0 Palasha-wood, I am cutting thee for the obtaining of agreeable food.' This lends support to the view that the term Artha' in the preceding Sutra defining One Sentence' stands for Purpose; each of the complet- ed sentences serving a distinct purpose and hence regarded as a distinct Sentence. In this connection, however, it may be noted that a single Yajus-text cannot be broken up into many distinct sentences in this manner without sufficient authority; such author- ity as has been shown above, in the form of the Brahmaṇa-text related to the Yajus-text. This form of Distinct Sentences' is thus permissible only in very rare cases; in fact, not until it is shown that no other construction is possible, either in view of the peculiar structure of the text itself, or in virtue of some direct injunction necessitating such split; and the reason for this lies in the fact that in a case where the nature of the sentence is such that it admits of being taken as one Sentence,-if we have recourse to splitting up the sentence into several distinct Sentences we incur the responsibility of abandoning the natural Syntactical Construction without any authority; and further, when the Sen- tence, taken as a single Mantra, would lead to a single resultant transcendental result, we-by forcing the split-make it necessary to assume a number of such results proceeding from each of the distinct Mantras into which the original sentence may be split up. And in cases where we have no direct injunction necessitating and justifying the said splitting, and where the splitting necessitates the addition of new words, these words, being supplied by our- selves, without the authority of a Vedic Injunction, cannot be regarded as 'Vedic,' and hence, the Mantra containing these non- Vedic words would no longer remain Mantra' in the strict sense of the term. 
--- 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
• 
• 
193 
To the foregoing Principle, we have a corrolary to the effect that-Where different parts of a Mantra-text are found, by their implication, to be meant for serving distinct purposes, each such part should be regarded as a distinct Sentence. For instance, in the Mantra-text Syonante sadanam kṛnomi 
tasmin sida' (Taitti. Br. 3.7.5.2, and Manava-Shrauta-Sutra 1.2.6,19)-we find that the first part, by what it expresses, is intended to be employed in the act of 'preparing the Seat' for the Cake,-while the last part, in the same manner, is intended to be employed in the act of actually depositing the Cake on that prepared Seat; on this account the Mantra-tert is taken as containing two distinct Sen- tences. This has been called 'the Principle of Distinct-Sentences due to diversity in use'. (Bṛhati MS. p. 79b). 
III. PRINCIPLE OF ELLIPTICAL EXTENSION—ANUŞANGA. 
This has been thus set forth in Su. 2.1.48.-Elliptical Exten- sion should complete the Sentence; as it is equally applicable to all. That is, in certain Yajus-texts, it is found that there are several sentences that stand in need of a certain Word or Phrase or Clause, while the whole of the original text contains only one such Word or Phrase or Clause; in such cases it would appear,-and it has been held as the Prima Facie view-that the Word or Phrase or Clause is to be construed and used along with only that one of the several sentences which happens to be nearest to it, and the Lacunae in the other sentences are to be filled up by means of words of common parlance introduced by ourselves, It is the possibility of such construction that this Principle precludes. By this Principle, the Word, Phrase or Clause in question is to be used along with every one of the Sentences,-provided that every one of these is of the same type and form; and the reason for this is that the intervention of a similar sentence does not become an obstacle to Syntactical Connection. As an example, we have the text-(A) 'Yûte agne' yaḥshayā tanūrvarṣiṣṭhā gahvarēṣṭhā ugram vacho apavadhittvēşam vacho apavadhit svāhā'-(B) 'Yā të agnē rājāshaya-(C) 'Ya te agne harashaya'-Hence, by the prin- ciple just stated the Clause tunuh... svaha' has to be construed with each of the three sentences (A), (B) and (C) and its connec- tion does not cease with (A); in this way the text in question is taken as three distinct sentences. 
F, 25 
194 
PURVA-MIMÄMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
In this text, the common clause to be connected with each of the three sentences forms the principle clause in each sentence; but the principle is equally applicable to cases where each of the sentences is complete in itself; but there are certain words that form a subordinate factor and which need a principle sentence with a verb with which it could be connected,-and the text con- tains more than one such sentence. For instance, in the text- '(A) Chitpatistrā punātu—(B) Vākpatisṭvā punātu—(C) Dēvastvā savitā punātu achchidrēņa pavitrēṇa vusoḥ sūryasya rashmibhiḥ' (T.S., 1.2.1.2), the subordinate clause- achchiḍrēna mibhiḥ has to be taken with each of the three sentences-(A), (B) and (C)-ending with the verb 'punātu. (Br. MS., pp. 51b- 52; Tantravārtika Trs., 599 et. seq.) 
1 
rash- 
Under Su. 2.1.49 we have an exception to the above. Says the Sutra-There should be no Elliptical Extension where there is intervention of unconnected words.'-This, says the Tantra- vārtika (Trs., p. 607), supplies a counter-instance to the function- ing of mere Proximity in the matter of Elliptical Extension. For instance, there is the text—“ (A) Saṁ tē vāyurvātēna gachchhalām (B) Sam yajatrairangāni-(C) Sam yajña-patirashiṣa' (M.S.1.2. 15); here the singular verb 'gachchhatam' as occurring in sentence (A), cannot be construed with sentence (C), because the connection between these two has been interrupted by the sentence (B), which cannot be construed with the verb 'Gachchhatam' of the preceding sentence, as the plural noun" angani (in B) would need the verb in the plural form-which would be Gachchhantām'; thus then, the connection between (A) and (C) is cut off by the intervening noun in the Plural Number; and until there is connection between (A) and (B) there can be no connection between (A) and (C). For this want of connection thus there is a special reason in the shape of the said intervention; and so long as this special reason is there, it is not possible for the complementary word 'gachchhatām3 to betake itself to the third sentence (C). For these reasons, the intervening sentence (B)-which needs a verb in the Plural Number-as also the third sentence (C) whose connection with the verb in the first sentence (A) is interrupted by the intervening sentence (B)-have to be completed by the adding of words of common parlance.-(Shabara-Trs., p. 221.) 
On all this, Kumārila has the following remarks-In cases 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
195 
where there is Elliptical Extension, the Sentence thus completed forms a regular Mantra or Fajus; and hence any mistakes in the uttering of this would involve an Expiatory Rite; whereas if the Sentence is completed,-not by Elliptical Extension, but by the addition of words of common parlance,-it does not become a regular Mantra and hence any mistakes in pronunciation are not serious and do not involve an Expiatory Rite. (Tantra, Va., Trs., p. 608.) 
(B) BRAHMANA-TEXT 
The Mantra and Brāhmaṇa constitute the Veda; of these, the Mantra, has been defined and described; hence it follows that all the rest of the Veda is Brahmana (says Su., 2.1.33). That is, those Vedic texts which are not found to possess the distinctive features of the Mantra are to be accepted as ‘Brāhmaṇa'. (Shabara-Trs., p. 204.) 
Kumārila remarks (Tantravārtika, Trs., p. 572)-There would have been no use in having this Sutra, if it were known to all men that the Veda consists of only Brahmana and Mantra. As a matter of fact, however, there are many people who are ignorant of this fact; and since such people may entertain the notion that they may be a third class of Vedic texts, it is necessary to state clearly that in the l'eda, all that is not Mantra is Brāhmaṇa. 
C 
No clear-cut definition of the Brahmana-tert has been pro- vided, and all we have been told under Su., 2.1.33 is that those parts of the Veda which do not possess the character indicated as distinguishing Mantras are Brāhmaṇa '—(Shabara, Trs., 204). Shabara continues-For the benefit of students, however, the Vṛttikāra has supplied the following details regarding the char- acteristic features of the Brāhmaṇa:-(1) Abounding in the particle iti'; (2) Containing the phrase. So they say '; (3) Anec- dotal; (4) Ratiocinative; (5) Explanatory; (6) Deprecatory; (7) Commendatory; (8) Doubtful: (9) Injunctive; (10) Descriptive of something done by another; (11) Historical; (12) Transpository. In connection with this, there is the following declaration:- 
C 
There are ten. kinds of Brahmaṇa-tert-Ratiocinative, Ex- planatory, Deprecatory, Commendatory, Doubtful, Directly 
196 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
Injunctive, Descriptive of what is done by others, Historical, Transpositional and Analogical.' (Shabara, Trs., p. 204.) 
C 
• So 
Shabara, however, proceeds to point out that as in the case of the Mantra, all this is purely illustrative, not exhaustive; as some of these characteristics are found in Mantras also. For in- stance, we have the Mantra abounding initi' in Rgveda 10.119. 1)—' Iti vă iti vā manaḥ, etc.';-one containing the phrase they say, we have in R.V., 7.41.2- Bhagam bhaksityāha';- the anecdotal Mantra we have in R.V., 1.116.3-Tugro ha bhuj- yum, etc.';-the Ratiocinative Mantra in R.V.. 1.2.4- Indavo rāmushanti hi, etc.';-the Explanatory Mantra in T.S., 5.6.1.3- Tasmādāponusṭhāna, etc.';-the Deprecatory Mantra in R.V., 8.6.23—' Moghamannam vindatë, etc.';--the Commendatory Mantra in T.S., 4.4.4.- Agnirmürdha, etc.';-the Doubtful Mantra in R.V., 10.129.5- Adhaḥ svidasidupari svidăsit, etc.'; —the Directly Injunctive Mantra in R.V., 10.117.15—' Pṛṇiyā- dinnadhāmānaya, etc.';-Mantra Descriptive of something done by others-in R.V., 8.21.18 Sahasramayută dadat, etc.'; the Historical Mantra in R.V., 10.19.16- Yajněna yajñamayajanta dēvāḥ, etc.' 
C 
C 
C 
We have seen that those Vedic texts that are not Mantras have all been classed as Brāhmaṇa-texts; and this has been regarded as synonymous with Injunctive texts; the idea being that all these are either Injunctions of acts or assert something in regard to those Injunctions. (See below.) 
C 
These Brāhmaṇa or Injunctive texts have been classed under five heads-(1) The Karmotpattivākya, the text injunctive of an action-e.g., One should perform the Agnihotra';-(2) the Guṇavakya, the text laying down the necessary accessory details connected with the enjoined act; e.g., 'One should offer the libation of Curds ';-(3), the Phalavakya, the text mentioning the result following from the performance of the prescribed act; e.g., Desiring Heaven, one should perform the Agnihotra ';-(4) The Phalāya-guṇa-vākya, the text which lays down a particular acces- sary detail as conducive to a specified result; e.g., Desiring efficient Sense-organs, one should offer the libation of Curds ';- (5) the Saguna-karmotpatti vākya, the text injunctive of an act along with its accessary detail; e.g., One should perform the sacrifice with Soma'. 
1 
1 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
197 
Another classification of the Brahmaṇa-texts or Injunctions is under the following three heads: -(1) The Apurva-vidhi, Origina- tive Injunction, which lays down an act which could not be done unless so enjoined, e.g., One should sprinkle consecrated water on the grains ';-(2) the Niyama-vidhi or Restrictive Injunction, which lays down the doing of a certain act for a certain result, in preference to other acts leading to the same result; e.g., "The corn should be threshed,' this threshing being the 
the one method selected out of a number of the methods of removing the chaff from the grains; (3) the Parisankhya-vidhi, the Preclusive or Speci- ficatory Injunction, which precludes some from among a number of possible alternatives; e.g., the preclusion of the Mantra Imām- agrbhṇan, etc.' from being used in the holding of the reins of other animals, except those of the Horse.In the Niyama-vidhi, Restrictive Injunction (2), that alternative which a specially en- joined is already known as to be done, but only as one of the possible courses of action open to us, and the Injunction serves to restrict the choice to the one course enjoined;—in the Apurvavidhi, Originative Injunction, on the other hand, what is enjoined is entirely unknown as something to be done. This is what is meant by the saying-ʻ Vidhiratyanta-maprāptē niyamaḥ pākṣikē sati. In the Parisankhya-vidhi, Preclusive Injunction, all that is en- joined is already known as to be done, along with other acts, but not necessarily as possible alternatives; they may be known as all simultaneously possible, there is nothing that is unknown, all are known; and out of all these a few are chosen and specifically enjoined, as to be done, the others being precluded. 
There are several divisions and cross divisions of Injunctions set forth in the Mīmāṁsā-bālaprakāsha (pp. 12—41). 
The Injunctive process has been discussed in course of the treatment of Apurva (in Discourse II, Pada i, opening Adhi- karaṇa). 
We have seen that the sole means of knowing Dharma, our Duty, what we should do, consists in the Injunctive Vedic texts. The Injunctive text is, however, always a Sentence composed of several words;-the question arises as to which particular word in the Sentence it is that denotes the act to be done, and in what way this denoting is done. This question has been raised for the purpose of determining the difference between acts enjoined by198 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
different texts. In this connection the whole process of Injunction has been dealt with in great detail. 
" 
We shall take a typical injunctive-text, Svargakāmo yajēta (Desiring Heaven, one should perform sacrifice '); there are two etrms, Svarga-kāmaḥ' (Desiring Heaven) and 'Yajēta ' (Should perform sacrifice '); the former mentions the result that is desired by the Agent, and the latter lays down the act bringing about that result. This second term Yajeta' is composed of two parts (1) the verbal root Yaj' (which denotes sacrifice) and the Injunctive Conjugational Ending in', connoting Injunction. Hence the word that directly denotes what should be done is this Injunctive term ' Yajēta ' ('should perform sacrifice '). 
f 
C 
4 
In the connotation of this word Yajeta' also, there are two factors (1) The act of Sacrificing and (2) the accomplishment or bringing about, of that act. All verbs 
All verbs signify the bringing about of a certain act' says the Tantra-Va. (Trs., p. 474.) Of these two-the Act and the Bringing About, the Act is signified by he verbal root (Yaj '), and its bringing about is signified by the injunctive affix (Li); this bringing about is what has been given the technical name of Bhāvanā.' Thus it is this Bhavana or Bringing into being-or Bringing about-that is sig- nified by the Injunctive Lin. Bharana' is signified by the Verbal affix says the Tantravārtika (Trs., p. 486). 
This Bhavana or Bringing About, Accomplishment, which constitutes the Effort or Activity of the Agent-is of two kinds- (a) Arthi (Actual, External, Material) and (b) Shābdī (Verbal). Both of these contain three factors-(1) What is to be brought about or accomplished, (2) by what instrumentality it is to be brought about, and (3) the manner in which it is to be brought about. 
In the case of the Arthi or Actual Bhāvanā,-(1) What is to be brought about is the Final Result-Heaven, in the case of Sacrifices; (2) the instrumentality by which the result is to be brought about consists of the Act (of Sacrifice); and (3) the mannër or process of the bringing about lies in the entire procedure of the actual performance of the Act of Sacrifice. 
In the case of the Shabdi Bhavana, on the other hand, (1) what is brought about or accomplished is the Prompting of the 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
199 
Agent to activity, (2) this prompting is brought about by the instrumentality of the Injunctive, and (3) the process or manner of the prompting lies in the idea of the Excellence of the activity, derived from the Commendatory and other texts. 
C 
C 
This Bhāvanā, which consists in the Effort or Activity of the Agent towards the fulfilment of the desired result, is expressed by the affix in the verb; this much of the connotation is common to the denotation of all verbal roots; for instance, in the verb pachati' ('cooks '), the idea expressed is he does the cooking'; of these two factors of this act of cooking- does' and (2) ' cook- ing ',-the cooking as denoted by the verbal root is an accomplished entity; while the factor of does' is of the nature of something to be accomplished, as is indicated by the affix. Thus then, what is expressed by the phrase does the cooking is that one is doing the act that is conducive to the final result in the shape of the coming into existence of the Cooked Rice'; and this doing of the act is what has been called Bhavana', Bringing into Existence, Accomplishing. 
* 
6 
€ 
Similarly, in the case of the Vedic textSvargakāmo yajēta ' (Desiring Heaven, one should sacrifice '), what the injunctive affix denotes is that one should bring into existence the final result in the shape of Heaven '; and this is what is meant by Bharana'. This Bhavana-in its Arthi, actual or material form, -is made up of the three factors as explained above-(1) what is brought into existence,-(2) by what it is brought into existence,- and (3) in what manner it is brought into existence. 
This Arthi or Actual Bhāvanā itself, consisting in the Effort or Activity of the Agent, is something that is brought about by the Shabdi or Verbal Bhavana. In this (1) what is to be brought into existence is the prompting of the Agent to the Effort or Activity, (2) the means by which it is brought about is the Injunctive and (3) the process by which, it is brought about con- sists of the commendation expressed by the Arthavada-tects-as already explained above, 
[For further details re Bhavana, the reader should refer to Tantra-Va., Trs., pp. 475 et. seq. A logical and philosophical discussion on the exact nature and signification of the Injunction is contained in the Vidhiviveka-Nyayakaṇikā and in the Bhāvanā- vivēka.]. 
200 
PURVA-MIMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
(C) ARTHAVADA-DECLAMATORY TEXTS 
In the Brāhmaṇa-section of the Veda there are many texts that do not contain any Injunction; they are purely descriptive or declamatory. We have seen that it is the Injunctive text of the Veda that supplies us with the Knowledge of Dharma, of what should be done. The question that arises now is what bearing have these other Declamatory texts upon the knowledge of Dharma? Have they any bearing upon it at all? 
The Prima Facie View is that not being Injunctive, they can have no bearing upon the knowledge of Dharma; because these texts merely speak of things as they exist, not of what has to be brought about. Thus even though these texts form part of the Veda, they do not serve any useful purpose regarding the know- ledge of Dharma. 
The Finally Established View is as follows:-It is true that the texts in question do not lay down anything to be done; but in almost every case it is found that the text is related, in some way, to another text which is directly injunctive, laying down something to be done. Under the circumstances, if the two texts are correlated, and construed together, it is found that the Decla- matory text serves the purpose of eulogising and commending what is laid down in the Injunctive text; and in this way it serves the useful purpose of tempting and prompting the active agent to the performance of the act laid down in the Injunctive text. 
For instance, there is the Injunctive text-' One should sacrifice the White Goat to Vayu ',-and related to this is the Declamatory text- Vayu is the eftest Deity; and this latter text, by eulogising Vayu, serves to commend the act of sacrificing to that Deity- which act has been enjoined in the Injunctive text. Thus serving the purpose of bringing about the activity leading to the enjoined performance, the declamatory text helps in the performance of Dharma. (Su. 1.2.1-18.) 
< 
Nor does this correlation of the two texts vitiate the self- sufficient authority of the Injunctive Text; because so far as the providing of the knowledge of the particular Dharma—the act of sacrificing is concerned, the Injunctive text. stands self-sufficient; it is only the prompting of the Agent that is done by the other : text. 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
• 
201 
The first classification of these Arthavada or Declamatory Texts is into (1) Descriptive by direct intention,-e.g., Fire is the antidote for cold ',-(2) Descriptive by indirect implication, -e.g., During the day, the Smoke alone of the Fire is perceived, not its light',-(3) Descriptive of an Accomplished Fact or Past Event, e.g., Prajapati cut out his own omentum '. 
C 
< 
There is another classificaton by which there are 38 kinds of Declamatory Texts. These have been described and exemplified in the Mimamsābālaprakāsha (pp. 448-58). The following are a few of the more important kinds that have been enumerated by Shabara (Under Su. 2.1.33, Trs., p. 204), as having been described by the Vṛttikara: -(1) Abounding in the Particle iti', (2) Con- taining the phrase So they say,' (3) Anecdotal, (4) Stating a Reason, e.g., 
* One should make the offering with the winnowing basket, because by that is Food prepared ',—(5) Explanatory-e.g., Therein lies the curdishness of the curd ',-(6) Commendatory— 'Vayu is the eftest Deity',-(7) Condemnatory,-e.g., His Fires are impure',-(8) Expressing Doubt,- The Libation should be. poured in the Ganhapatya, or the libation should not be poured'; -(9) Injunctive, e.g., The Post made of Udumbara should be of the size of the Sacrificer',-(10) Describing what is done by others-e.g., He cooks maşṣa-grains only on my account', (11) Historical, e.g.,The ancient people came in with flaming fire- brands'; (12) Transpositional, e.g., One should perform as many sacrifices as the Horses he receives,' (where receives' is meant to be transposed by gives '). 
C 
C 
The difference between (10) Parakriti (What is done by others) and (11) Purakalpa' (Historical) has been pointed out by the author of the l'artika as that the former is descriptive of what has been done in the past by a single person, while the latter describes what has been done in the past by two or 
• 
(Mīmāṁsābālaprakāsha, p. 51.) 
more persons.- 
In regard to Prabhakara's view regarding the Arthavada-tert, there seems to be some confusion in the minds of students, created by what Gadadhara Bhaṭṭācharya has said in his Shaktivada, to the effect that according to Prabhākara, the Arthavāda-texts can- not be regarded as a trustworthy means of knowledge because they åre inexpressive; as in accordance with the Anvitābhidhāna theory of Verbal Expression only that sentence is really expressive which 
F. 26 
202 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
lays down something to be done; and hence under this theory, it is only the Injunctive Sentence that can be really expressive and hence capable of providing knowledge of Dharma. Though this may be true regarding the Arthavada text taken by itself, it cannot be accepted as the view of Prabhakara regarding Arthavada-text, as forming part of the Veda; because on referring to the Bṛhati, we find that the above view is only the Prima Facie View on the question of the reliability and authority of Arthavada-texts; and this Prima Facie View is demolished in the Finally Established View, under which the Arthavada-text also is decided to be as Vedic and authoritative as the Injunctive text. The Prima Facie View on this question as put forward by the Bhāṭṭa is simply that these texts are untrustworthy, while as put forward by the Pra- bhakara it is that they are inexpressive (and hence untrustworthy); and this is the form that has been adopted by the opponent in view of Prabhakara's Views regarding Verbal Expression referred to above. The Finally Established Conclusion adopted by Prabhakara, however, is that the Arthavada-text is as much. Veda' as the Injunctive text, as like the latter the former also expresses the performability of certain acts, through the commen- dation that it directly expresses. (Brhati-MS., p. 30.) Though it may be true that, strictly according to Prabhakara's view, the Arthavada-text cannot be expressive, yet this can be urged only against such Arthavada-texts as are absolutely incapable of being construed and co-ordinated with an Injunctive text. Most of the Arthavāda-texts, however, are actually found capable of being so construed and co-ordinated. And thus helping, through com- mendation, the initial prompting done by the Injunctive text, it serves a useful purpose in pointing out the performability of the Action enjoined, and hence it is perfectly entitled to the title of Veda', says the Brhati (MS., pp. 29-30). Vidhyuddeshādēva kāyāvagatiḥ ... Yato hi kartavyatāvagumyatē sa vēdaḥ Asmachcha karyatāvagamyatë '. 
.C 
C 
• 
On this question of the authority of Arthavadas-Declamatory Texts-Murari Mishra states the Siddhanta, Final Conclusion, as follows, in his Tripädi-Nitinayana: What is to be done needs, for its own expression, the commendation (contained in the Decla- matory Text), as aiding the Injunctive Word; and it is not the commendation as expressed by the Declamatory Text that is indi- cative of the act as to be done. (P. 23, MS) 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
203 
The trustworthy and useful character of Arthavada-texts in general has been established. The Sutra (1.2.19-25) takes up the consideration of those Arthavida-texts whose exact character- whether they are Injunctive or Declamatory—is not easily determin-. able. Says the Bṛhati (MS., p. 30) The trustworthy and useful character of the Declamatory texts having been established, the question arises as to how to regard those few texts which are found to be capable of being taken as independently Injunctive and also as merely Declamatory, related to, and subserving, other clearly injunctive texts.' 
C 
C 
For example, there is the text- Audumbaro yupo bharati ūrgudumbaraḥ ūrk pashavaḥ úrjo'varudhyai '—(A)' The Post is made of Udumbara Wood . . . the Udumbara is strong;-(B) One obtains strong cattle by using that wood'. Here there are two sentences-(A) stating that. the Post is to be made of the Udumbara wood, and (B) stating that one obtains strong cattle by using the said wood. Now it is agreed on all sides that the first sentence is directly injunctive; but in regard to the second sen- tence (B), the question arises-Is the second sentence also injunc- tive-enjoining that One should acquire cattle by using Udum- bara wood '? Or is it merely Declamatory, meant to be construed and co-ordinated with the preceding sentence (A),-the meaning expressed by the two sentences being One should make the Post of Udumbara wood,-it being so powerful as to be conducive to the acquiring of powerful cattle'? This doubt regarding the second text is due to the fact that it has the appearance of an Injunctive tert, and yet there is no Injunctive word in it. The Prima Facie View (under the Prabhākara interpretation) is that the exact signi- fication of the text being doubtful, it fails to be a reliable guide and thereby the reliability of the entire Veda becomes vitiated. The Established Conclusion is that the exact significance of the text is not doubtful; the Sentence in question is purely Declama- tory, a pure Arthavada. It is admitted on all hands that so long. as we can construe and co-ordinate the sentences occurring together as constituting a single complete sentence containing a single Injunction, it is not right to find in them several Injunctions; as the unnecessary multiplication of Injunctions is always to be avoided. Again in the case of the two sentences in question, even if we regard them as containing two Injunctions, the second sen- tence would enjoin an action that would follow only from the 
204 
PURVA-MIMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
C 
action enjoined by the first sentence. For instance, the second sentence would enjoin the obtaining of Cattle' by making the Post of Udumbara wood ';-and it is just this making that is enjoined by the first sentence. In this manner also the two sen- tences are shown to be related, as pointing virtually to the same action- the making of the Post with Udumbara wood'. This is thus explained in the Brhati- 
साध्यद्वयावगमेऽपि प्रमारणतः सिद्धसाध्यतयैव एकार्थावगतिः । ( MS., p. 30b) 
Explaining this passage, the Rjurimalā says (MS., p. 332)— 
यद्येकार्थावगतिः तदानुकूलं निमित्तं कल्पनीयम् । एकोऽर्थः सिद्धरूपोऽभ्युपगम्यताम् अपरश्च साध्यरूपः । 
येन परस्परसम्बन्धे सत्येकार्थावगतिरुपपद्यते ॥ 
That is to say if the whole text is taken as pointing to a single act, then sufficient reason should be found for such interpretation; and this reason lies in the fact that one of the acts mentioned (the making of the Post) must be regarded as something accomplished, and the other (i.e., the obtaining of Cattle) as something to be accomplished by what has been accomplished before; it is only thus that the two sentences in the text could be construed as lay- ing down a single act'. 
The Bhatta presentation of this topic is somewhat different. Under the Prima Facie View the second sentence is taken as an Injunction, laying down the Fruit (Result) of the Action enjoined in the first sentence;-and the Established Conclusion is that it does not actually enjoin the Fruit, it is merely Declamatory, serv- ing the purpose of Commending the action enjoined in the first 
sentence. 
The general Principle derived from the above is that even those Arthavada-teats which resemble an Injunction only serve the purpose of commending the act already enjoined by another Injunctive text;-they do not enjoin a different act. (l'ide Su., 1.2.19-25.) 
There is another typical Arthavada-text which has been dealt with in Sutra 1.2.26-30;-that kind of text is dealt with here which appears to be putting forward a reason for an act that has been enjoined in another sentence. For instance, there is the text — Shūrpēņa juhoti—tēna hi annam kriyatē, which contains two 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
205 
sentences-(1) One should offer the libation with the Winnowing. Basket,-(2) [Because] Food is prepared by its means.' The first sentence enjoins the act of making the offering with the Winnowing Basket. In regard to the second sentence there arises the question -Is it to be taken as providing a reason for what has been enjoined in the first sentence? Or is it meant only as a commendatory decla- ration, commending the use of the Winnowing Basket? The Prima Facie Fiew is that the particle hi' (Because ') contained in the second sentence clearly shows that it is the Statement of a reason in support of what has been enjoined in the first sentence. The Established Conclusion is that-the Vedic Injunction does not stand in need of any support; hence, the said Statement of Reason would be entirely futile. The second Sentence therefore is to be taken only as commending what has been enjoined in the first sentence. 
The general principle derived from this that whichever Vedic texts are found to be laying down Reasons, the Sentence wherein the reason is stated should be taken as purely Commendatory, not as justifying the previous Injunction, nor as a separate Injunction. 
It may be noted here that this Principle has been misunder- stood by their Lordships of the Privy Council at the instance of a lawyer who himself seems to have been misled. The question before the Courts was-Can an only son of his parents he adopted? -There are texts distinctly forbidding it; one of them unfortunate- ly is accompanied by the Statement of a Reason. The first sentence of the text forbids the giving or taking in adoption of an only son; and the second sentence asserts 'because he is for the perpetuation of the family'; and it was held that as the prohibi- tion had been accompanied and suggested by the statement of a Reason it could not be mandatory, it must be taken as purely commendatory. Accordingly, it was decided that an only son may be adopted. We have seen, however, that what has to be regarded as Commendatory and not mandatory-is the sentence Stating the Reason, not the previous Injunction or Prohibition. So that it does not touch the mandatory character of the prohibition of the adoption of an only son. It may be noted that there are other texts also-e.g., one from Shaunaka that prohibits such adoption,-with- out the statement of a reason. The decision of the Privy Council thus is not supported by any Frinciple of Mīmāṁsă at all, as has been alleged in law-books. 
206 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Some people have explained Sūtras 1.2.31-53-which we have explained above, under the section dealing with Mantras, as estab- lishing the fact of Mantras being expressive and serving the pur- pose of indicating certain details in regard to the enjoined acts, -as treating of cases where there is conflict between what is indi- cated by the Mantra-text and what is declared from the Declama tory-terts. The question being as to what should be done in such cases, the Prima Facie View is that such a conflict nullifies both the texts and hence such texts cannot be regarded as authoritative or reliable. The Established Conclusion is that, while what is indicated by the words of the Mantra-text is got at through the Indicative Power of the Words of the Vedic text itself,-and as Indicative Power is more authoritative than Syntactical Connec- tion,-what we learn from the Words of the Mantra-text should have preference over what is learnt from the Declamatory text. 
(D) NAMADHEYA-PROPER NAMES 
The four parts of the 'Veda' bearing upon the subject of Dharma have been described as-Injunctive Texts, Declamatory Texts, Mantra-Texts and Names. The functioning of the first three has been set forth above. Sutras 1.4.1-30 have dealt with the fourth part, which has been called 'Namadheya' or 'Name', in view of the fact that it deals with those texts whose exact signi- fication depends upon the signification of the individual words in the text, and most of these words are found, after due investigation, to be Proper Names of Sacrifices and other things. In almost all these cases, the Prima Facie View, according to Prabhakara would be that the exact signification of the word in question being doubtful, the Vedic text containing that word cannot be reliable; and the Established Conclusion is that the exact signification of the word is not doubtful, the word is a Proper Name; hence there is nothing doubtful, about the meaning of the text. 
Shabara has taken as a typical text of this class, the sentence ‘Udbhidā yajēta' (Tāṇḍya Br. 19.7.2); ( One should sacrifice with the Udbhid'). In regard to this, the question is-what is the exact signification of the term 'Udbhid'? Apparently it should be a material or some accessory with which the enjoined Sacrifice is to be performed; and yet there is another possible interpretation whereby the term Udbhid being the name of a particular Sacrifice, 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
207 
the text lays down that particular Sacrifice which is named 'Udbhid'. The Prima Facie View is that "the word should be taken as laying down the material to be used at the sacrifice, as it is only thus that the text would be serving a useful purpose in connection with the Sacrifice that has been enjoined by the injunctive word in the Sentence, 'Yajēta'. On the other hand, if it were taken as the name of a Sacrifice the text would not be serv- ing any useful purpose; as the Sacrificing has been already enjoin- ed elsewhere; and the mere adding of its name would be futile." According to Prabhakara, under the presentation of the Prima Facie View it is pointed out that in being taken as laying down a material substance, it could stand only as that by which something is pierced (Udbhidyatē anēna); and as sacrificing with such a digging instrument would be absurd, the whole text becomes absurd and thus the authority of the Veda becomes vitiated.. The Estab- lished Conclusion is as follows:-The word should be taken as the Name of a Sacrifice. It cannot be taken as laying down the material, because no such material substance as Udbhid is known. among people,-in the way that other words like 'dadhi', 'dugdha' are. By being taken as laying down a material, therefore, it would entail the absurdity pointed out by the Prima Facie View. On the other hand, if the word is taken as the Name of the Sacrifice, the clear meaning of the text comes to be that one should perform that particular sacrifice which is called Udbhid.--The text, says Shabara (Trs. p. 128), does not enjoin the name; what we mean is that the word Udbhid serves as a reference by name to the parti- cular Sacrifice; and this reference is based upon the Etymological Signification of the term 'Udbhid'-by which the term connotes that by which the desired result (cuttle, in this case) is brought about. (Su. 1.4.1-2). 
Under Su. 1.4.1-2, above we have dealt with the case of such words as have no generally-accepted connotation, and whose con- notation has to be deduced from their Etymology. The next sec- tion (Su. 1.4.3) takes up the case of such words as have well-recog- nised connotations. The term taken up as typifying such terms is 'chitrayā' as occurring in the text 'Chitrayā yajēta pashukāmaḥ' (T.S.2.4.6.1). In this case, the term 'Chitra' is well-known as connoting a female animal of variegated colour; and accordingly the text may be easily taken as meaning that 'One should perform the sacrifice with a female animal of variegated colour.' The208 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
objection against this interpretation is that under this inter- pretation the single word 'chitraya' would be laying down two qualifications of the animal-feminity and variegated colour -and this would involve a Syntactical Split; hence the Estab- lished Conclusion should be that, in the manner shown in the preceding case, the term 'Chitra' should be taken as the name of a Sacrifice; and the text therefore should be taken to mean that 'One should perform that Sacrifice which is named Chitrā.' (Su. 1.4.3). 
Su 1.4.2 has dealt with words which had to be taken as the Names of Sacrifices, because it was found that if they were taken otherwise, as mentioning sacrificial accessories, they could do so, only indirectly through indication; e.g., the term 'Udbhida' had to be taken as 'Udbhidratā', i.e., that which involves the use of the material Udbhid.' 
C 
C 
Su. 4 takes up the case of those words which are capable of being taken as mentioning sacrificial accessories without recourse to indirect signification of any kind. The word 'Agnihotra' itself is such a word. This word is found in such texts as 'Agnihotram juhuyāt svargakāmaḥ.' Here the term Agnihotra' has to be taken as a Bahuvrīhi compound as 'agnayê hotram yasmin',' that in which the libation is offered to Agni'; and from this it is clear that the word speaks of Agni as the Deity of the offering enjoined by the text. Hence the Prima Facie View is that by means of this word 'Agnihotra', the text lays down the Deity of the offer- ing. This view cannot be accepted, as the Deity of the offering in question has already been indicated by another text,-in the shape of the Mantra Agniriyotiḥ etc.'; so that the indicating of the same Deity by the text in question would be futile. Hence the Establishd Conclusion is that the term 'Agnihotra' is only the Name of the offering in question. 
Under Su. 1.4.3, we have dealt with a word which was found capable, in its own natural connotation, to be expressive of a sacrificial material; but this was found unacceptable on account of the 'Syntactical Split' that it involved. Su, 1.4.5 takes up a word which is capable of connoting a sacrificial accessory without involving any 'Syntactical Split'. Such a word is 'Shyena' contained in the text Shyeněna abhicharan yajēta’. The word 'Shyena' directly denotes the bird 'Kite'; hence the 
CHAPTER XX: EXTENT AND CONTENT OF VEDA 
209 
Prima Facie View is that this text lays down the Kite as the . material substance to be offered; the sacrificial offering thus consisting of the Kite-bird, in place of the Soma, which is the usual substance offered at the Agnistoma-Sacrifice,-when this Sacrifice is performed with a view to encompass the death of a certain person; hence the text is to be taken as laying down a particular substance the Bird, Kite-to be offered at the well- known Agniṣṭoma-Sacrifice. A text following close upon the text in question is found to eulogise the sacrifice herein laid down by likening it to the Kite; from which the Established Conclusion is deduced that the Kite is not meant to be the material offered; and the word has to be taken only as the Name of the Sacrifice,—this name being based upon the said Eulogy which likens the Sacrifice to the Shyena (Kite). 
< 
Counter-instances where certain terms cannot be taken as names have been dealt with under Su. 1.4.9 et. seq. The word agnēya' may be taken as typical, in this connection; it occurs in the text Agnēyo'ṣṭākupālo bhavati'. The question is-Does this word 'agnēyaḥ' lay down Agni as the Deity of the offering ?. Or is it the name of the offering? The Prime Facie View is that, in accordance with the reasons adduced in connection with the word 'Agnihotra' above, the term 'Agneya' also should be taken as a name of the offering.-The Established Conclusion is that in this case there is no other text which could be taken as laying down the Deity for the offering enjoined in the text; hence if this word 'Agneya' were taken as the name of the offering, and not in its ordinary connotation, whereby it speaks of Agni as the Deity to whom the Eight-pan Cake is to be offered,-then there would be nothing to tell us who the Deity is to whom this offer- ing is to be made; and this would make the Vedic text futile.. 
The treatment of the subject of Names also concludes with the deduction of two general Principles for determining doubtful cases. (1) The first of these Principles is presented under Su. 1.4.29; where it is pointed out that in doubtful cases, the ques- tion is settled with the help of subsequent Commendatory texts. For example, we have the text- Aktaḥ sharkari upadadhati ' (One should put in wetted pebbles'); but it is nowhere laid down. with what particular liquid the pebbles are to be wetted; and it would seem as if it were left to the whim of the performer which 
F, 27 
210 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
particular liquid he is to use. But later on, we find the passage 
- Clarified Butter is longevity itself'; and this praise bestowed. upon Clarified Butter leads us to conclude that it is with Clarified Butter that the pebbles are to be wetted. Similarly, there is a text laying down the wearing of clothes', but it is not said whether it is cotton or silk that should be worn; a subsequent passage, however, is found praising silk as the clothing of the Deities'; and we conclude that silk-clothes should be worn. 
" 
C 
(2) The second general Principle is that the Indefinite is rendered Definite by the capacity of things. For instance, the substances generally offered at sacrifices consist of Clarified Butter, Meat and Cake; and for the slicing of these substances, three implements have been enjoined (1) Ladle, (2) Knife and (3) Hand. The uncertainty or indefiniteness arises as to whether or not there is any restriction as to the particular implement to be used for the Slicing of the particular substance. The Prima Facie View is that there should be no restriction, as we find no texts that would justify such restriction. The Established Con- clusion, however, is that the indefiniteness or uncertainty in this case is removed by the natural capacity of the things concerned; so that the Ladle is to be used for Slicing' in the case of the Liquid Substances, like Clarified Butter,-the Knife is to be used in the case of solid substances, like Meat, and the Hand is to be used in the case of the Cake and such things as are capable of being sliced with the Hand. 
C 
CHAPTER XXI 
SMRTI AND CUSTOM AND OTHER SOURCES OF 
THE KNOWLEDGE OF DHARMA 
(A) INTRODUCTORY 
It has been shown so far that Veda in all its parts-Injunc-. tive, Declamatory, Mantras and Names-is the reliable source of knowledge relating to Dharma, and like the orthodox Mimāmsaka Jaimini has declared under Su. 1.1.2 that the Veda is the sole authority, in matters relating to Dharma, Duty-what we should do and not do;- and yet in actual practice he found that by the time that he systematised the Vedic Exigetics, the l'eda had become so remotely ancient that it was not found sufficient for the pur- pose of obtaining the proper knowledge of the whole Duty of man, and the knowledge derived from the Veda had to be supplemented by that derived from certain other sources, notably such sources 
as the works known under the comprehensive name of 'Smrti," and also the Usage or Custom of respectable people. It was in view of this fact that Manu and other writers on works relating to the Duty of Man laid down, at the very outset of their works, that the Source of Knowledge of such Duty consists (in the order of precedence) in the Veda, the Smrti, the Usage of good people, and even Self-Satisfaction (Conscience). It was in view of this same fact that Jaimini found it necessary to 
necessary to devote a special Section of his Sutras (Pada iii of Adhyāya I) to the consideration of the authority and reliability of these other supplementary sources of knowledge. 
The propriety of this consideration may be explained in several ways:-We can form no idea of the knowledge of the Veda itself until we have understood it in all its bearings; and it is only with the help of Smṛti and Custom that it can be under- stood; it is necessary therefore that the exact nature of these latter should be investigated. Again, finding that Smrti and Custom also provide us with the knowledge of the Duty of Man, this fact might be regarded as vitiating the main thesis of the Mimämsaka that the Veda is the Sole authority on the subject; in order to guard against this, and to ascertain how far Smrti and Custom 
211 
212 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
may be allowed to affect the authority of the Veda itself, from which alone they derive this authority. Lastly, the subject- matter of Mimāmsā having been declared to be 'Investigation of the nature of Duty',-of which the foremost and entirely reliable source of knowledge has been declared to consist of the Veda in all its parts, it is only right and proper that the nature of the other likely sources of knowledge should be considered.-Says Prabhakara-The Smrti also has been accepted by people learn- ed in the Veda as authoritative and trustworthy; hence it is neces- sary to investigate its character.' (Bṛhati, MS., p. 31.) 
- 
In this connection, Jaimini's conclusion is that wherever it does not contradict the Veda, the Smrti is to be regarded as authoritative; but in order to be consistent with his main thesis that the Veda is the Sole authority, he adds that the Smrti is to be regarded as authoritative only in so far as it is based upon, and derives its authority from, the Veda. For instance, in considering this matter, Shabara and Kumārīla have cited the Smṛti-text lay- ing down the performance of the Aşṭaka,-a Rite that has not been enjoined in any Vedic text, and inasmuch as the Smṛtis are the work of human authors and are dependent upon their intelli- gence and memory,-which cannot be infallible,-the authority of the Smrtis cannot be inborn and Self-Sufficient, like that of the Veda; and yet, on the other hand, the Smytis are found 
to be accepted as authoritative by an unbroken line of Vedic scholars from time immemorial; hence it is felt that they cannot be entire- ly untrustworthy. (Tantra-Vārtika Trs., p. 105).-The Prima Facie View on this question is that "In asmuch as Dharma is based upon the Veda, what is not-Veda should be disregarded.' 
(Su. 1.3.1). The Established View however is that the Smṛti is trustworthy, as there could be inference of its basis in the Veda, from the fact of the agents being the same'-(Su. 1.3.2). That is to say, in the case of the Smrti (which represents what has been remembered by the writer) of men of the three higher castes, who are Vedic Scholars, there must be actual connection, and basis, for the said Remembrance, in actual Vedic texts. The previous Cognition therefore, which is necessary for the validating of Remembrace, is thus traceable to the knowledge derived by the writer from the l'eda; and it being possible that such Vedic text has been forgotten,-the inference of such a text becomes justi- fiable. (Shabara, Trs., p. 89.) 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
(B) EXAMPLE-AŞTAKĀ-OFFERING. 
213 
The instance that is cited in illustration of the above is that of the Smṛti-tert which lays down the performance of the Aṣṭakā. The Prima Facie View regarding this text is, that the perfor mance not being enjoined in the l'eda, the Smrti-text prescribing, it should be rejected as having no authority. But the Establisheu Conclusion is that, it is justifiable to infer the existence of the Vedic Text as the source of the Injunction contained in the Smrti; and thus being based upon the l'eda, this latter should be regard- ed as a trustworthy source of knowledge.' 
Prabhakara's presentation of this topic is more consistent. According to him, the question of the authority of Smrti (or Custom) does not concern the slimāmsaka; the subject-matter of the present Discourse is the Means of Knowing Dharma; and it has been established that the Veda is the only reliable Source and Means of this knowledge; hence the whole of this Discourse should devote itself entirely to the question of the authority of the Veda only. In accordance with this view, the text chosen as dealing with the Aṣṭaka and the present enquiry is the purely Vedic Mantra- text-Yāñjanāḥ pratinandanti, etc., etc.'-and not any non-Vedic Smrti-text, like the one cited above. This Mantra-text is found to speak of the Divinity of the Night, and thus becomes connected with the Aşṭaka-Rite which has been laid down in the Smrti, in which the Divinity of the Night figures as the Deity. Now in regard to this Mantra-text relating to the Aṣṭaka, the Prima Facie View is as follows: The Smṛti-Declaration that the Aṣṭaka should be performed is found to accomplish its purpose of enjoining the Rite, only through the help of the said Vedic Mantra-text;-this Vedic text also as indicating the Divinity of the Night, must have had in view the same Aştaka-Rite in which the Divinity of the Night figures as the Deity, and which has been enjoined only in the work of a human author;-thus the Vedic text is found to be dependent upon the work of a human author, and this shakes the inborn and self-sufficient authority of the Vedic-tert, and thereby the authority of the entire Veda becomes vitiated."-The Established Conclusion however is as follows:-When we have found that the person who wrote that the Aṣṭaka should be per- formed must have found a basis for the rule in the Veda itself,- then the Injunction of the Astakā must be regarded as emanating 
214 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
from the l'eda itself;-so that the Mantra-text Yañjanaḥ, etc.' also is indicative of the Divinity that figures in an act enjoined originally in the Veda itself;-thus the Mantra-text is not depen- dent upon the Smṛti-rule; it is based upon the Vedic-text upon which primarily the Smṛti-rule is inferred to rest. (Ṛjuvimalā.) 
The entire Mantra-text mentioned here as indicative of the Divinity of the Night is 
C 
यां जनाः प्रतिनन्दन्ति रात्रिं धेनुरिवायतीम् । 
संवत्सरस्य या पत्नी सा नो अस्तु सुमङ्गली । 
Here Asṭaka is spoken of as the Divinity of the Night, and eulo- gised as the Consort of the Year';-herein we have a Vedic text speaknig of Astaka as an object of adoration,-this is what has been taken to be indicative of the desirability of performing the Asṭaka-Rites. 
(C) CONNOTATION OF THE TERM 
C 
( 
SMRTI ' 
In later classical literature, the term Smrti is found to include all Smṛtis proper,—such as those of Manu, Yājñavalkya, Vashistha, Gautama and others, as well as the Itihasas, Purāņas and the Sutras-Shrauta, Grhya and Dharma. In the present context however the term has been taken by Kumarila and his followers to include only those Smrtis that are applicable through- out Aryavarta and to all men resident therein; and under this category, Kumārila places the Itihaass, the Puranas and the Smṛti of Manu only, (Tantravārtika, Trs., p. 244). The other Smrtis, such as those of Atri, Gautama, Vashistha and others,- he relegates to another category and deals with them separately under Sü. 15-16 Et. Seq. The following relevant remarks of Kumārila are instructive and interesting:- Barring the Purāņas, the Smrti of Manu, and the Itihasas, all other Smrtis;-such as those of Gautama, Vashistha, Shankha-Likhita, Hārīta, Apastamba, Baudhayana and others, as also the works on Grhya, are each studied exclusively by only certain sections of Brahmanas, and each of these has its sphere restricted to a single Veda. For instance, the Sutras of Gautama and of Gobhila are accepted by the Chhandogya (Samavedin) Brahmana only; those of Vashistha, by the Rgvedin only; those of Shankha-Likhita by 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
215 
the Vajasaneyin (Yajurvedin) only; and those of Apastamba and Baudhayana by the Krsna-Yajurvedin only. It is a matter therefore for consideration whether the authority of these is universal or restricted!' (Tantra. Vā. Trs., pp. 244-245.) (See below under Su. 1.3.15-23.) 
The Bhasya or the Bṛhati does not state definitely what works are meant to be included under the name 'Smrti. 
With regard to Itihisas and Puriņas, Kumārila takes a liberal view. In all these works, direct Injunctions are found embodied in a mass of matter of a purely descriptive character; these latter are relegated to the category of Arthrvada', being descriptive of acts done by good and bad men of ancient and modern times. These are regarded as Arthavada, purely decla- matory, because, if the stories found therein were really true, then, with reference to these at least, the injunction to recite would be useless, as no useful purpose could be served by the reciting of mere descriptions or stories; hence these have to be taken as implying the praise or dispraise of acts, and they need not therefore be taken as absolutely correct in regard to facts. In justification of this method of instruction adopted in Itihāsas and Puriņas, Kumārila makes the following remarks (Tantra. Vā. Trs., p. 26):-' Guided as they were by the study of the Veda, Vālmiki, Vyāsa and others composed their works on the same lines as the Veda; that is the reason why we find in the works of these writers many apparently useless stories and descriptions,- as in the Veda; and as those for whose benefit these works were intended were persons of varying degrees of intelligence, and of diverse tastes, it was only proper for them to introduce every kind of matter in their works, so that they might be of use to all men. Hence it is that in certain parts we find pure injunctions, while, in others, the Injunctions are interspersed with Arthvadas,-the sole motive for this diverse procedure lying in the making of the works attractive and useful to all men.' 
As regards the authority attaching to these works, it has been held that some of the Injunctions contained in them are such as are based directly on the Veda, while some are based upon con- siderations of pleasure and pain as experienced in the world;- among the Arthavada or Declamatory passages also, some are those same that are found in the Veda, some are based on ordinary ex- 
216 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
perience, and some are purely imaginary, like ordinary poetry; but all these have an authority due to the fact that they eulogise enjoined acts and deprecate forbidden ones. As regards those passages that are not capable of being thus taken along with Vedic Injunctions or Prohibitions-some are such as give pleasure in the mere reading; to this class belong such descriptions as those of the Gandhamadana and other sites;-while others, descriptions of wars and battles serve the purpose of encouraging the brave as well as the coward, and thereby serve distinctly useful purposes for the kings of men. In those cases however where none of these explanations is possible,―e.g., in the Hymns addressed to Deities, -we assume an unseen transcendental result. Then again, the Puranic description of parts of the earth serves the purpose of distinguishing places fit for the due performance of religious and other acts. The history of families and races of men serves to differentiate the people of different castes and is based upon the memory of men and also on direct perception. The details as to measures of time and space are intended to regulate the ordinary practices of men; so also the sciences of Astronomy and Astro- logy, all these are based upon direct perception and mathema- tical calculation. The description of the future state of things serves to point out the character of the various periods of evolving time, and also the results of righteous and unrighteous conduct. These are based directly upon the Veda.' (Tantra. Va. Trs., p. 119.) 
--- 
So far we have dealt with Itihasas and Puranas. Now as regards the Smrtis proper, that is, those that constitute the ' Dharmashāsra', five hypotheses are possible: 
possible(1) That the author of these Smrtis were totally mistaken in what they said. This view however has been rejected on the ground that it is not compatible with the fact that all these works are excellent compi- 
lations containing useful teachings; and also on the ground that this assumption would necessitate further assumptions as to the stupidity of the people who have accepted these teachings. (2) The second possible hypothesis is that the assertions are based upon the personal observations of the authors. This view also has been rejected, as it assumes, in the first place, the said 'observation', and, in the second place, the possession of those powers of observa- tion by means of which they could make correct observations regarding Dharma which has been shown to be beyond the reach 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
217 
so forth. 
of the ordinary Means of Knowledge. (3) The third hypothesis is that the authors learnt what they have written from other persons, their authority thus being based upon Tradition. This also has not been accepted, because in matters relating to Dharma, no trust can be reposed upon mere Tradition, which, in this case, cannot be trustworthy. (4) The fourth hypothesis is that the Authors have intentionally put forward wrong teachings for the purpose of leading people astray. This hypothesis has been re- jected because it involves a number of baseless assumptions, such, for instance, as a motive sufficiently strong to lead the writers to adopt this deceptive course, and also that people have allowed themselves to fall into the trap laid for them and (5) All the above four hypotheses having been found to be un- acceptable, the orthodox Mimamsaka has put forward the view that the teachings contained in the Smrtis are all based upon Vedic texts. This hypothesis necessitates only one assumption,— that of the existence, and the subsequent disappearance from our view, of such Vedic texts as are not found in the Veda-texts that are available at the present day. As a matter of fact, for most of the Injunctions contained in the Smrtis, corroborative Vedic- texts are easily found; but there are some for whom we seek in vain for corroboration in the Vedic texts available to us; and with regard to these latter, it has been held that the Vedic texts corro- borative of these also were well-known to the compilers of the Smṛtis, and have since become lost along with numerous Vedic Rescensional Texts no longer current. Instead of compiling these Vedic Injunctions themselves, the Sinṛti-writers had recourse to another method, because the order in which the Vedic Injunctions in question were found in the Veda was found, in the later de- generate times, to confuse the ordinary man; and so the writers set about arranging and classifying the various Duties and setting them forth in language more intelligible to the ordinary House- holder. (Tantravārtika Trs., pp. 112-114.) 
As in the case of the Itihasa and Purana, so in that of the Smrti also, those portions that bear directly upon the Duties have their source in the Veda; while those bearing upon Pleasure, Pain, etc., are based upon ordinary experience; and as for the stories that are met with here and there, they serve the purpose of the Arthavada-commending the Good and condemning the Evil act.-(Ibid.) 
F. 28218 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
The Prabhakara view of the trustworthy character of Smṛtis does not differ materially from the above, except in rgard to such Smrti-texts as are neither injunctive nor prohibitive of action. On this point, says the Prakarana pañchika- The Smṛti-texts for which direct corroboration is not available are inferred as having such corroboration,-such Inference being based upon the long line of tradition represented by the Smṛti-writers, each of whom drew his information from predecessors, and so on and on from time immemorial, to eternity. This eternal corroboration of Smrtis is proved in the same manner as the Eternality of the relationship between Words and their Denotations. (Pp. 100- 101). Those Smrti-texts however which do not enjoin or prohibit any action need not be regarded as authoritative on matters relat- ing to Dharma. To this category belong the texts that speak, for instance, of the souls being born in vegetable bodies and so forth, In all these cases, the texts may be regarded as having meanings other than those directly expressed by them. (P. 150.) 
(D) VEDANGAS, 
As regards the Vedāngas, i.e., the Six Auxiliary Sciences, Kumarila makes the following observations, in the Tantravārtika (Trs., pp. 119-122):- 
Among the Auxiliary Sciences, there are certain portions that treat of things useful in sacrificial performances, while other parts are useful only in the securing of some perceptible worldly purpose; and these have their basis in ordinary experience. (1) In the Shikṣā, Phonetics, we find an account of the organs of Pronunciation, Accents and allied matters. These have their use in the correct recitation of Vedic hymns; and such declara- tions as the Mantras recited with the wrong accent or wrongly pronounced injure the reciter' are based upon the Veda itself. (2) The Kalpa-Sutra, Ritualistic Science, contains explanations of the real import of the Injunctions deducible from the rules scatter- ed about in the Veda; and these have their source in these same Vedic texts. The rules of conduct laid down in the Sutras for the guidance of the Priests are based upon considerations of general convenience. (3) Vyakaraṇa, Grammar, provides the knowledge of the correct and incorrect forms of words, and this serves a per- ceptible purpose, and has its basis in direct perception itself, 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
219 
(4) The case of the Nirukta, Philological Exigetics, is similar to that of Vyakarana and it serves the purpose of regulating the sense. in which a word may be correctly used. (5) As regards Chhandaḥ, Prosody, the correct differentiation of the metres 
of the metres of Mantras serves a useful purpose in connection with the Veda and also with ordinary experience. (6) Lastly the Science of Jyautis, Astro- nomy, provdies the knowledge of dates and Asterisms, based upon mathematical calculations. These serve useful purposes in fixing the time for sacrificial performances. Astrology also, which is another phase of the same Science, is based upon the Veda itself, dealing as it does, with things unseen' and also the future. The Science of Architecture stands on the same footing as that of Jyautis. The Science of Mimimsa is based partly on the Veda, partly on ordinary experience, and partly on Perception, Infer- ence and other Means of Knowledge; and like the other main Auxiliary Sciences, this also has been worked upon by a long continuous line of Teachers. The Science of Reasoning has its use in saving men from unrighteous paths. Based upon the Veda, in its three parts, Injunction, Upanisads and Arthavada,-it points out the trend of the ordinary misconceptions from which unrighteous conduct proceeds,-not dogmatically, but in a manner calculated to bring conviction home to the sceptic; it begins with setting forth reasons available in support of conflicting views on a particular issue, and then, after duly weighing the arguments for and against each view, leads on to the correct final conclu- sion. If such standard typical reasoning were not available in collected form, ordinary men would find themselves at the mercy of any and every clever man that might come up to guide him; and there would be no standard by which to judge of the absurd- ness or otherwise of the various views and the reasons propounded in support of them. 
As regards the philosophical hypotheses relating to the Origin of the world and such other matters, these have their source in ideas arising out of certain Mantra and Arthavada-texts, and these Hypotheses serve to point out the general truth that the Gross has its source in the Subtle. And the use of all this lies in the due comprehending of the relation of Cause and Effect, without which the connection between the Act and its Results could not be grasped. The doctrines of Idealism, of Perpetual Flux, 
etc., etc., have all been propounded for the sole purpose of disuading 
220 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
people from cultivating an undue attachment to the things of the world. 
Thus all the Smrtis and the Auxiliary Sciences are authorita- tive; they derive their authority directly from the Veda. In the case of all these, we find two kinds of results depicted-those to appear in the very remote future, and those to appear immediate- ly in the present; and the texts pertaining to the former kind are based upon the Veda, while those relating to the latter kind have their basis in ordinary experience. 
C 
C 
(E) CASES OF CONFLICT BETWEEN VEDA AND SMRTI 
> 
The authority of Smrti in general has been established; the next question that arises is in regard to the comparative authority of the Smrti and the Shruti (i.e., the Vedic text); or, as the ques- tion has been put in the Sutra-Bhāṣya,-How are we to regard those Smrti-terts which are found to be inconsistent with Vedic texts? 
On this question also, as on every question bearing upon this part of the Sutra, Prabhakara (Bṛhati MS., p. 32) turns the Prima Facie View on to the authority of the Veda itself; he states it as follows:-" Where there is contradiction between a 
a well- known Vedic-text and a Smṛti-text, and through this latter, between the former Vedic-text and the Vedic-text presumed as the basis of the Smrti-text, the two must nullify one another; and when such is found to be the case with some Vdic-text, the Uni- versal authority of the entire Veda becomes shaken."-The Established Conclusion is as follows:-In as much as the Smṛti text is not self-sufficient in its authority, needing as it does, corro- boration by the Vedic text, presumed for certain reasons, when- ever a Smrti-text is found to be inconsistent with a Vedic text which is well-known and has not got to be presumed, there can be no justification for presuming a Vedic text contrary to the one already well-known; which presumption would lead to the nulli- fication of both the Vedic texts. Hence when it comes to a choice between the well-known Vedic text on 
the one hand and the Smrti-text not corroborated by any presumed Vedic text, on the other hand, there can be no hesitation in rejecting the latter in favour of the former. The two opposite courses of action laid down in the two conflicting texts cannot be regarded as optional 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
221 
alternatives; as such option is pemissible only in cases where the two texts are possessed of equal authority. This condition is not fulfilled in the case in question, as the authority of the Vedic text is direct and self-sufficient, while that of the Smrti is indirect and dependent upon corroboration by a presumed Vedic text. Hence the conclusion is that no authority can attach to a Smrti which is in conflict with the Veda. (Sutra 1.3.3.) 
Sūtra 1.3.4 has been interpreted by the Bhāṣya in two ways: By the first interpretation, it is made to supply a further argu- ment in support of the conclusion arrived at in the preceding Sutra; this further argument being that Smpti-te.rts conflicting with Vedic-texts can have no authority as they are often found to have their source in the ignorance or greed of the officiating priests. 
Under the second interpretation, the Sutra (1.3.4) is taken as a Topic by itself-dealing with such Smrti-terts as are not in conflict with any Vedic texts, but are found apparently to be due to the ignorance or greed of the priests. For instance, there is a Smrti-text laying down that the cloth with which the Sacrificial Post has been covered is to be given away to the Adhvaryu Priest. The conclusion regarding such Smpti-texts is that they have no authority at all. The Brhati (MS., p. 32B) adds that what is denied here is, not the authority of all that may be found to have its source in the world of visible effects, but only the authority of those Smyti-tearts that claim to pertain to the world of invisible effects, and are yet found to have their source in visible facts. That is to say, the above-mentioned Smpti-text laying down the giving away of the cloth to the Priest has nothing inherently un- trustworthy in itself, so far as the mere act of giving is concerned, as bringing warmth to the recipient; but if the said giving be regarded as bringing about an invisible result in the shape of Merit for the giver, then its authority becomes vitiated by the fact that it has its source in the greed of the Priests. 
The above interpretation of the last two Topics, by which many Smrti-texts become deprived of their authority and reliabi- lity, has not been accepted by Kumarila; with his orthodox instincts, he is not prepared to reject the authority of any Smṛti- text. In the Tantravārtika (Trs., pp. 154-163), he has shown that there is no real conflict involved in the instance cited in the 
222 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Bhāṣya; and so long as there is no such conflict, there is every justification for presuming the existence of Vedic texts in corro- boration of the Smṛti-texts concerned; and thus the two courses of action, one laid down in the Vedic text already available, and the other laid down in the Smṛti text as corroborated by the pre- sumed Vedic text-can be reasonably regarded as optional alterna- tives. In accordance with this idea, Su. 3 should be interpreted to mean that in a case where we find the Vedic text laying down one course of action, and the Smrti-text another, there being an apparent conflict between the two texts, it is desirable that in practice we should adopt the course laid down in the Vedic text.' This does not imply the rejection of the Smṛti-text; it lays down a preference for what is enjoined in the Vedic-text; and that too on the ground of this latter being independent of extraneous support and corroboration. 
There is yet another interpretation of this Topic, suggested by Kumarila (Tantra. Va. Trs., p. 165):-The Smrtis spoken of in the Bhasya as to be disregarded are not the orthodox Smṛtis compiled by Manu and others, but those so-called 'Smṛtis' that have been compiled by the later Secessionists from the orthodox fold. It is interesting to note what Smrtis have been placed by Kumarila under this latter category. (1) First of all, comes the compilation of certain texts bearing upon Dharma and Adharma, made by Shakya', and by the propounders of the 'Sankhya, the Yoga', the Pancharatra'. the Pashupata' 
( 
6 
C 
and 
the like, all of which have a certain amount of support of the Veda; they derive strength from certain visible results unconnect- ed with the Veda, and from arguments seemingly based upon Perception, Inference, Analogy and Presumption. Secondly, there are those compilations that lay down certain instructions with regard to the securing of livelihood, and treat also of cer- tain incantations and recipes for the amelioration of diseases and other ills, the usefulness whereof is relied upon on the basis of success in a few stray cases. (3) Lastly, there are certain com- pilations known as Smṛti' which lay down some of the most repugnant practices. 
According to Murari Mishra, the Smrti, contrary to Shruti, is to be rejected; he is in agreement with Prabhakara, not with Kumārila.-(MS., p. 51.) 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
223 
Sutras 1.3.5-7 according to Shabara's interpretation, embody an independent Topic, dealing with some other instances of con- flict between Veda and Smrti. Up to Su. 4, we had the treatment of such Smṛti-texts as lay down acts to be done for the purpose of obtaining desired results. Su. 5-7 deal with those Smṛti- terts which lay down such small acts as are performed, not for the purpose of accomplishing desired results, but only on certain occasions during the sacrificial performances. To this category belong the Smṛti-terts laying down such acts as the wearing of the Yajñopavēta during sacrificial performances, using the right hand at performances, the Rinsing of the mouth on certain occasions during the performances, and so forth. The question that arises. regarding these is-are the texts laying down these acts to be regarded as being in conflict with the Veda? The Prima Facie View is as follows:-" They do confleit with what is laid down in the Veda; and hence cannot be regarded as authoritative. For instance, when one rinses the mouth in course of a sacrificial per- formance, in obedience to the injunction contained in the Smrti, he interrupts the sacrificial performance by introducing an act which does not form part of the performance as prescribed in the Veda."-The Established View is that the Rinsing of the Mouth is a positive act, while the order of sequence among the sacrificial details is only a qualifying factor of the act; and when there is a conflict between an Act and a qualifying factor, it is only right that the latter should make room for the former. Hence there is no real conflict in this case; hence the Smṛti-text need not be rejected. 
On these Sutras 5-7, Kumarila holds an entirely different opinion. Accodring to him, none of the Smrti rules cited in the Bhāṣya in this connection-that relating to the rinsing of the mouth, etc., is in conflict with any Vedic text. (Tantra-Vā. Trs., p. 178.) 
- 
He argues thus:-It is not quite correct to cite the wearing of the Sacred Thread (Yajñopavita) as an act in conflict with the Vedic act. Because it has been already declared in the Veda in connection with the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa Sacrifices that the wear- ing of the Sacred Thread is a sign of godliness, and as such it has been laid down as a necessary accompaniment of the said sacri- fice. The wearing of the Sacred Thread has also been laid down 
224 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
as a general rule in the Katha-Recension of the Yajur-Veda, where it has been prescribed, not with reference to any particular sacrificial performance, but as a necessary accompaniment of all sacrificial performances, and also of Vedic Study. Similarly, with regard to the act of Rinsing the Mouth, this act has been laid down in connection with the daily Vedic Study; and it is implied that it is to be done in connection with all utterances of Vedic texts; from which it clearly follows that it is a necessary accompaniment of the sacrificial performance itself. 
From all this Kumarila concludes that these three Sutras (5-7) do not embody a distinct Topic. He therefore 
therefore proposes another interpretation of these three Sutras. According to this interpretation, Sutras 5 and 6 do not introduce a new Topic, they continue the consideration of the preceding Topic, bringing for- ward certain arguments for and against the Established Conclu- sion; and Sutra 7 embodies a distinct Topic by itself. According to this interpretation, the sense of Sutras 5 and 6 is as follows: If the opponent argues that "a rule emanating even frm a here- tic should be accepted as authoritative when it is found that it is not contrary to the Veda,-such rules, for instance, as one should tell the truth, be charitable and so forth," (Sū. 5),—then we deny this, because the extent and number of authoritative scriptures is limited-(Su. 6);-the established conclusion therefore is that Dharma can bring about its results only when it is understood with the help of those scriptures which are recognised as having their basis in the Veda. As for Sutras 7, it stands by itself, embodying the Topic of the Authoritative Character of the Prac- tices of Good Men; the sense of the Conclusion as embodied in the Sutra being that those acts which cannot be ascribed to any worldly motive, and which are yet done by Good Men, must be recognised as Dharma' ;-this would be the Established View in answer to the Prima Facie View that "Many practices & re found to be repugnant to the Veda, hence no authority should attach to Practice." The meaning of the Established View is that when, in regard to any particular Practice, we find that it is current among good men, and we cannot attribute it to greed or any such sordid motive, we should accept it as authoritative, as Dharma. 
C 
(See below, for a fuller account of this Adhikarana, which is particularly interesting.) 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
225 
There is another interpretation suggested by Kumarila of Sutras 5-7-Under this interpretation. Su. 5 is taken as part of the previous Topic, ending with Su. 4, and Sü. 6 and 7 are taken as embodying the Topic of the Practices of Good Men; under this interpretation Su. 6 embodies the Prima Facie View that "Practices cannot be regarded as authoritative in matters relating to Dharma, because the number and extent of authoritative scrip- tures is restricted to the Veda and its auxiliary Sciences",—and the Established View is embodied in S. 7 in the sense described in the previous paragraph. 
There is yet another interpretation suggested by Kumārila, whereby all these three Sutras 5, 6 and 7 are taken as embodying the Established View in answer to a Prima Facie View supplied from without, bearing upon the Practices of Good Men. The sense of these Sutras in this case would be as follows:- If the Practices of Good Men are not in coflict with what is taught in the l'eda and in the Smrti, such Practices can be regarded as authoritative in matters relating to Dharma; but when there is the least thing repugnant to the teaching of the Veda, then, as there would be a conflict of authorities, the Practices cannot be regarded as having any authority at all.' (Tantravārtika, Trs., 173-203.) 
Kumārila's treatment of the Topic of the Practices of Good Men is specially interesting (ride Tantra. Vā. Trs., pp. 182-200). It is as follows:- 
In regard to the Practices of Good Men and their authority relating to Dharma the Prima Facie View is as follows:- "In the Practices of Good Men we find frequent transgressions of Dharma, and also cases of daring excesses, as in the case of (1) Prajapati, (2) Indra, (3) Vashistha, (4) Vishvamitra, (5) Yudhisthira, (6) Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana, (7) Bhishma, (8) Dhṛta- ṛāṣṭra, (9) V ́āsudēva, (10) Arjuna and others of old times, as also many good men of our own days. For instance,-(1) We find that Prajapati fell in incesstuous love with his own daughter, Uṣā;— (2) Indra, and also Nahusa in his place, is said to have committed adultery-(3) Fashistha, when struck down with grief on the death of his hundred sons, is said to have contemplated suicide, a terrible crime-(4) l'ishramitra helped a Chandala to perform sacrifices;-(5) King Pururavasa contemplated suicide when Urvashi left him;-(6) Kṛṣṇa-Dvaipayna, who was under the vow 
F. 29 
226 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
of life-long celibacy, begot sons on the wives of his young brother, Fichitravīrya;—(7) Bhīṣma led a life contrary to all caste-regula- tions, and committed an irregularity in performing sacrifices, though he was unmarried (and hence not entitled to perform Sacrifices);-(8) Ehṛtarastra, though suffering from congenital blindness and hence not entitled to perform sacrifices, performed several sacrifices and that too with the wealth amassed by his brother Pandu, to which he had no rightful claim;-(9) Yudhis- thira treated as his wife the girl that had been won by his younger brother and told a base lie calculated to encompass the death of his Brāhmaṇa-teacher;-(10) Vasudeva and Arjuna used to drink, even to excess. Among modern people also, we find Brāhmaṇa-ladies of Ahichchhatra and Mathura addicted to wine; the people of the North' carry on the business of giving and accepting in gift, and buying and selling, lions, horses, mules, asses, camels and even animals with two rows of teeth; and they are also in the habit of eating in the same 
dish with their wives, children and friends;-the people of the 'South' marry the daughter of their maternal uncle, and partake of food while sitting upon chairs;-amog the people 
of the 'North' as well as of the 'South', there are many such instances of gross transgression as the partaking of the remnants of food left by one's friends and relations, taking of beetles touched by men of all castes, not washing the mouth after meals, wearing clothes brought in directly from the back of the washerman's ass, socially associating with people guilty of the most heinous crimes. Then again the Practices of Good Men of various countries are at variance with one another; many of the Practices have their source in such perceptible causes 
as Greed and the like. Such practices certainly can have no authority on matters relating to Dharma. Lastly, those men are regarded as Good whose conduct is Good,-and again we regard such conduct as Good which is practised by those men; thus there is an inter- depend nee which leads us nowhere. As regards Manu's decla- ration that Practices of Good Men' are an authority on Dharma,' we can place no reliance upon this; as the same writer includes 'Self-Satisfaction' also as such an authority; which is surely absurd. These cannot afford any standard for our conduct; as they are so completely at variance with one another. This decla- ration of Manu therefore must mean something different,' 
4 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
227 
To the above indictment, Kumarila has offered the following answer, which embodies his Established Conclusion on this subject:-When no motive can be detected, the Practic in question should be recognised as useful. (Su. 1.3.7). That is to say, when we find that certain acts are done by good men, and we cannot attribute them to any such perceptible motive as greed and the like, they should be accepted as Dharma, as what should be done. In fact, only those acts are to be regarded as Dharma which good men hold to be Dharma and do as Dharma: and this view has been held because the men who do them are the same persons who perform the sacrifices enjoined in the l'eda. To this class belong such acts as-Charities, Telling Beads, Offering Libations into Fire, Making Offerings to Ancestors, Celebrations like the Shakradhvaja and other such festivities in connection with Temples, Keeping of certain observances by married girls, Illu- minations, distributing sweet cakes and other foods, festivities on the seventh and thirteenth days of Magha and the first day of Phalguna, on the advent of Spring. Authoritative writers of Smrti admit of the generally authoritative character of such of these as are not repugnant to the teachings of the Veda. And this idea is based upon the fact that we can always assume Vedic texts in corroboration of these Practices on the ground of the performers of these being the same as those of the acts prescribed in the Veda. As a matter of fact, from time immemorial, it has been found that the Practices of Good Men are in keeping with the scriptures. 
C 
The good men whose Practices' 
Practices are meant here are those only who are inhabitants of Argararta-the tract of land bound- ed by the Ocean on the East and on the West, by the Himalaya on the North and the Vindhya on the South. This limit has been inferred to be based upon the Vedic texts that speak 
that speak of the 'Disappearance of the Sarasvati' and the Dippings from the Plakṣa-tree',—the former expression referring to the place where the Sarasvati-satra was commenced and the latter, where it was completed; and all this has been taken as indicating the tract round Kurukṣētra, in the plains of which the river Sarasvatī is said to have disappeared. 
These people are called 'good', not primarily on account of their good conduct, but on account of their being found to be acting228 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
always in accordance with the scriptures; when on this ground, they have acquired the reputation of being 'Good',-if they are found to do any other acts, in support of which Vedic texts are not available, it comes to be believed and presumed that the acts concerned must be righteous and good,-otherwise the good men' would not have done them. 
4 
Self-satisfaction' also is an authority', only in the case of such men as have their mind steeped in Vedic lore and in the idea that only those acts are to be regarded as 'Dharma' which have been enjoined in the Veda. And the minds of such people cannot be 'satisfied' on the doing of what is wrong. 
As regards the specific instances of transgression by well- known great and good men that have been cited above, in the first instance, the passages of the Itihasa and Purana that have been understood to be descriptive of the transgressions may have a totally different meaning; and secondly, the laws and rules. whose transgressions have been cited may be meant only for ordi- nary men, and not for superhuman persons like Prajapati and others; or thirdly, the acts may be justified on the ground that the persons concerned were superhuman beings and hence not subject to the same limitations of conduct as weaklier human agents; or fourthly, we may explain the said transgressions in such a way as to clear them of all repulsiveness. 
The following explanations have been suggested: 
(1) When Prajapati' is spoken of as falling in love with his own daughter, the name 'Prajapati' stands 'one who protects all creatures'; and as such, it can be taken as standing for the Sun; and it is an ordinary fact in nature that towards morning the Sun brings forth the Dawn which is named 'Ușa'.-and hence this Dawn or 'Uşa' is his 'daughter', and the phenomenon of the Sun letting his rays fall on the Dawn has been figuratively spoken of as the male approaching the female. 
C 
* 
(2) Indra has been described as the Jara '-Paramour-of Ahalya';-now, the term indra' is derived from the root 'idi', to shine, and thus denotes one who is resplendent; in this sense 
indra becomes the name of the Sun. The Sun is the ‘Jāra'. not paramour, but the destroyer, in the literal sense of Jārayati- nashayati '—of Ahalya',-which 
Ahalya',-which stands, not for a lady, but for the Night, in the literal sense of 'Ahani liyate' 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
2229 
disappearing during the day'; when the Sun rises, the Night dis- appears; and it is this natural phenomenon that is described as 'Indra' (Sun) being the 'jara' (destroyer) of 'Ahalya' (Night). 
(3) As regards Nahusa, it is true that when he attained the position of Indra, he made advances towards Shachi, Indra's wife; but through this misbehaviour, he fell from his exalted place and was born as a snake all which clearly shows that what he had done. was wrong, dharma. And so far as Shachi was concerned, she proved loyal to her husband and rejected the advances made by Nahuṣa, whereby her greatness and glory became enhanced, which shows that such constancy is Dharma. 
(4) In the case of Vashistha, it is clear that what he did was due to excessive grief, and hence no one ever regards it as Dharma. It is only what the good men know to be Dharma and perform as such that is to be accepted as Dharma, while all those acts that are found to have been done even by Good Men need not neces- sarily be accepted as Dharma, when they are found to have been done under the undue influence of Anger, Grief, Greed, Lelusion and the like. 
(5) Similarly in the case of Vishvamitra also, as he had reached a high degree of austerity, we may condone a few minor transgressions on his part according to the maxim that "For a powerful man every thing is wholesome "; or we may absolve him from blame on the ground that he was capable of throwing off the sin through penances. But for ordinary men such transgression would be irretrievably harmful and wrong. 
(6) As regards Kṛṣṇa-Draipāyana, it was under his mother's orders that he begot children on the wives of his younger brother, related to him through his mother, in due accordance with scriptural injunctions. Even if his action involved transgression, it was thoroughly atoned by his severe austerities before and after the transgression. 
(7) Bhişma—and Rama also-performed sacrifices when they had no wife. Though both of them knew how essential it was to have the wife associated with such performances, they did not have their wivs,-Rama not marrying a second wife on account of his great love for his first wife, and Bhisma, not marrying at all, because of is great regard for his father to whom he had promised that he would never marry; and as both of them had 
230 
PŪRVA-MIMÄ::SA IN ITS SOURCES 
a 
all 
paid their debt to their ancestors-Rama through his sons, and Bhisma through the sons of his Mother,there was no moral im- pediment to their performance of sacrifices. Then again, it has to be borne in mind that Rama kept by him at the sacrifice, golden image of Sita, because through his great regard for public opinion, he could not have Sitä herself, and through his anxiety to show his regard for Sita herself, he did not take another wife to himself. As regards Bhisma, the text of Manu lays down that if, among several uterine brothers, even one gets a son, the rest become endowed with sons, through that one son' (Manu, 9.182); so that he became endowed with sons through the sons of his brother Wichitarirya; (and under the circumstances, if he had married a wife, that would have been only for the purpose of carnal pleasure);-and yet, for aught we know, he may have married a wife for fulfilling the conditions of the sacrificial per- formances; as it is inconceivable that a man, who was so scrupu- lous regarding Dharma that he refused to hand over at Giaya the offering to his Father into the latter's own hands (when he ap- peared before him in person), in obedience to the scriptural in- junction that the offerings at Gaya must be offered on the Ground, should have committed such a blunder as to perform sacrifices with- out having his wife by him. (See Mahabharata-Anushasana Parca, 84.) 
(8) As regards Dhṛtarastra-We find it related in the Ãshcharya-parva that through Vyasa's favour, he obtained his powers of vision for the purpose of looking up on his sons; and from this we should be justified in presuming that through the same agency, he was able to see when the sacrifices were being performed, so that he could not suffer from the disqualification of congenital blindness. Or the Sacrifices' that have been attributed to Dhytarastra may be taken as standing for charities and other righteous acts. 
(9) The irregular matrimonial life of the five Pandavas has been explained by Vyasa himself. Draupadi appeared in the full bloom of youth out of the sacrificial altar; and as such she is the Goddess of Wealth herself, who does not become trained by asso- ciating with several persons; He has described her also as becom- ing younger day by day;-all which goes to show that she was not an ordinary human being; she was superhuman, and hence her 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
231 
actions are not to be judged by the crdinary standard of human proprieties. It is for this reason that Kṛṣṇa himself promised to Karna-who was a brother of the Pandavas-that Draupadi would go to him on the sixth day, after having been with the Pandavas for five days. If it were not for his super-human character of the Lady, how could such a righteous person as Krsna himself have made such an atrocious proposal?-Another explanation of Draupadi's case is that there were five distinct ladies; but they were all so much alike that they came to be known by a common name. The third explanation is that she was the wife of Arjuna alone by whom she had been won; and yet she is spoken of as being the wife of all the brothers, only with a view to show that there was not the slightest disagreement among the five brothers. Her super-human character is further emphasised by the fact that, when dragged to the Assembly of Kings, though she was not really in her courses, yet, on the spur of the moment she made herself appear so, with a view to expose the action of Dhṛtarăṣṭra and his sons in the worst light. Her character of Lakshmi too becomes fully recognised when she is regarded as the wife of Arjuna alone, who, in his previous life was Vara, the counterpart of Nārāyaṇa (Visuu). The Brahma-vaivarta Purāna (Prakriti- khanda) provides another supernatural explanation: Under Shlo. 
8. Adhyaya 14, it says that in childhood Sita, being eager to obtain a husband, asked it as a boon from Shira; and in her eager- ness she repeated the request five times.-Shiva took her at her word and said she would have five husbands; it was thus Sita, whe in her next life, was born as Draupadi. 
(10) Thus too as regards the action of Yudhisthira in telling a lie to encompass the death of his teacher, some authorities have declared that Expiatory Rites can be performed even when the re- prehensible act has been done intentionally; and as the Rites prescribed for this particular transgression consist of the Ashra- medha sacrifice, and Yudhisthira did perform this sacrifice,—all this shows that he recognised it as sinful, as Adharma, not as Dharma; hence the act cannot be included among the Practices of Good Men'. 
< 
(11) Then there remains the case of Krsna and Arjuna being drunk with wine, and having married the daughters of their respective maternal uncles,-both being instances of direct 
232 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
transgression of the Law. In this connection it has to be borne in mind that it is only wine distilled from grains that is called 'Sura,' and it is 'Sura' that has been forbidden for the 
for the three higher castes. As for wine distilled from grapes and other fruits -which is called 'madhu',-and that distilled from molasses- which is called 'Sidhu',-these have not been forbidden for the Kshatriya and the Vaishya, and it is for the Brāhmaṇa alone that all intoxicating drinks' have been forbidden. Thus the drinking of Madhu--wine distilled from grapes,-by Krsna and Arjuna cannot be regarded as a transgression of the Law. There are Vedic texts also which show that the drinking of wine in general is forbidden for the Brahmana only, and that the Madhu and the Sidhu are not forbidden for the Kshatriya and the Vaishya, 
As regards Krsna and Arjuna having married their maternal cousins',-such relationships are often mentioned even in cases where there is no real blood-relationship; hence it is possible that Kysya and Arjuna have been spoken of 'cousins' simply on account of their close friendship. Though Subhadra has been spoken as Kṛṣṇa's sister', yet we know only three persons- Balarama, Kṛṣṇa and Ekānamshā*-who have been named as 
Krsna's 
* Ekānumshā 
Mahabharata, Vana p. Ch. 217, 7-8. 
महामखेल्ला गिरसी रीप्तिमत्सु महामते । महामतीतिविख्याता सप्तमी कथ्यते सुता । ! at g cer unaaf aa: geseraà › qəråùfàarerg: ggafgu: gara || 
ar 
The Goddess Vidra fasy- born as the daughter of Yashoda and Nanda, exchanged for Krsna, according to Chapter 60 of Harivamsha, was called Ekānamshā: 
सा कन्यावदधे तत्र वृष्णिसद्मनि पूजिता । पुत्रवत् पान्यमानसा देवदेवाज्ञया तदा । बिडि चैनामोत्पन्नामंशादेव प्रजापतेः । एकानंशां योगकन्यां रक्षार्थ केशवस्य च । "Bṛhat-samihita of Varahamihira, Ch. 58, W. 37-39. 
एकानंशादेवी का बलदेवकृष्णयोर्मध्ये – That is, in installing the Ima in temples. 
In the Harivamsha, Chs. 166, 168 and 178 we find that the Yadaras invoked her aid in times of difficulty p. 47 U. 2. 
«Brahma-Purina (Ch. 57) calls the central figure in the triad in the temple of Jagannatha at Puri 'Subhadra' but gives her namaskara mantra thus 
hæcì adλ tâ aacì qualert, arft of quarter regrafa atseg à identifying her with Katyayani, that is, Ekānamshā,—[Ekānamshā and Subhadra'-by Jogendranatha Ghosh-J.R.A.S.B. Vol. II pp. 41-46 and plate7.] 
CHAP KI SMRTI ETC. 
233 
uterine brothers and sisters wide Mahabharata-Vana-217; 7-8); which shows that Subhadra was probably only a distant cousin of Krsna's, not his sister,-and not a child of Vasudeva's, in which latter case alone she could have been Arjuna's maternal cousin. It was in fact impossible for such a universally respected person as Krsna to have countenanced such a marriage if it had been in- cestuous. These same remarks apply also to Krsna's marriage to Rukmini who is said to have been his 'cousin.' 
In regard to all such transgressions, another explanation has also been suggested. It is argued that the Smrti is based upon the Veda, so also is the 'Practice of Good Men'; and the authority of both is independent; hence whenever there is conflict between the two, the two courses of action concerned should be regarded as optional alternatives, and neither need be regarded as unrighteous. 
This however is not right; because in the scale of compara- tive authoritativeness, the place of 'Practice of Good Men' is below that of Smrti; so that when there is conflict between the two the 'Practice' has to go to the wall. 
In connection with this subject one important consideration has been urged. Apastamba has clearly asserted that certain acts are not permitted in one part of the country, while they are quite permissible in another. This leads to the conclusion that such 'Practices' would be not sinful, only for those persons whose fore- fathers have been used to them; and yet they would be avoided by other people. This explanation also cannot be very helpful; because Gautama has declared that "All Practices contrary to the Scriptures are unauthoritative." It might be argued that the 'Scriptures' meant here are the l'edas, not the Smrtis. But this is not correct; because the term 'Scripture' includes the l'eda as 
well as the Smytis. It is impossible for us, therefore, to accept the authoritative character of such Practices as are contrary to the Smyti-law laid down by Manu and others. (Tantravārtika.) 
W 
It is interesting to note that the several interpretations of Sutras 3-7, propounded by Kumarila, have not been noticed by Prabhakara. 
(F) EXACT SIGNIFICATION OF CERTAIN WORDS. 
It has been established that the Feda and the Smyti (and also the Practices of Good Men, according to Kumārila) are the 
F. 30 
234 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
authoritative means of knowing Dharma. Under Sutras 1.3.8-9, Jaimini has taken up the subject of the right comprehension of the correct meaning of the texts that constitute the 'Veda' and the Smrti'. This question arises because there is an element of uncertainty in regard to the exact signification of certain words which are used in one sense among one set of people end in an entirely different sense among others. 
1 
The words selected for discussion under this head are th following:-(1) 'Yara'-used in the sense of Barley-corn among some people, and in that of Long pepper among others. (2) Taraha'-stands for the log among some people, and for the Black Bird among others. (3) Tetasa' is used by some people for the Banjula-creeper, and by others for the Black-berry. (Shabara, Trs., p. 100.) 
The question is that when words like these occur in the Veda or in the Smrti, in which sense are they to be understood. 
The Prima Facie l'iew is that "Since both the meanings are found to be signified by the word, the acceptance of the one or the other is a matter of option." 
The Established View is that-that meaning is to be regarded as more authoritative in which the word is used by persons who take their stand on the Scriptures, because it is more reliable than the other. (Su. 1.3.8). 
Shabara (Trs., p. 101) has found indications among Vedic texts themselves, lending support to one or the other of the two meanings attributed to the words. For instance, (1) in regard to the word Yava, he finds support for its denoting the Barley-corn in the Vedic text which speaks of the Yara-plant' as 'flourishing while other plants whither away',-which description is appli- cable to the Barley-corn, not to the Long-pepper. (2) Similarly in regard to the 'Varaha', the sense of log is supported by the Vedic text which speaks of cows running after the laraha (Shatapatha Br. 4.4.3.19), and it is the log not the Black Bird that is pursued by Cows. (3) In regard to the word 'Veta: a', the sense of Banjula-creeper is supported by the Vedic text which speaks of the Vetasa as 'water-born', which epithet can apply to the Bañjula-creeper, not to the Black-Berry. 
Kumarila demurs to the above interpretation of Sutras 8-9; on the following grounds-(T.V., p. 207). In the case of all the 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
235 
three words cited by the Bhasya, the significations that have been sought to be supported by means of scriptural texts are such as are already accepted to be the most authoritative, even according to common usage. In fact, in no country in the world is the word 'Yava' used, in common usage, in the sense of Long-pepper; nor is the word 'Vetasa' anywhere actually used in the sense of the Black-berry, or the word Taraha' in the sense of Black Bird. It is not right therefore to base our discussion upon these words. Then again, as for determining the correct significations of words the Sutras under 1. 4 have laid down several guiding principles. 
The present Sutras 8 and 9 should therefore he explained somewhat differently as follows:-The question arises-when we find that there is difference in the usages of the Arya' and the 'Mechchha',-are both equally authoritative? Or is one more authoritative than the other? The Prima Facie View is that in regard to visible things-and even in relation to Dharma-the authority of the Arya' usage and that of the Mechchha' usage are equal. The Established Conclusion is that what is supported by the Scriptures is more authoritative (Sü. 9); so that the usage of the Arya is more authoritative than that of the Mechchha. In fact, the inhabitants of Aryavarta take their stand upon the Scrip- tures; hence their notions alone can have any authority in matters of such significations of words as appertain to Dharma and its accessories; and even among those people themselves, we should accept that sense in which the word is used by one who is more learned in and more conversant with the Scriptures, in pre- ference to those sanctioned by the usage of people less learned in them. (Tantra. Va. Trs., p. 209.) 
(G) CONFLICT BETWEEN SMRTI AND USAGE. 
Kumarila has put forward a third interpretation of these same Sutras 8 and 9; by which they are made to deal with cases of conflict between Smrti and Usage. The Prima Facie View is that-inasmuch as both have their basis in the Veda, the contest between them is equal. (Su. 9). Just as the authority of the Smrti rests upon the fact of its being based upon the Veda, so too does that of Usage; hence there can be no difference between the two in point of authority We may even go further and assert that Usage is more authoritative than Smrti, because its effects, in the 
236 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
shape of action, are more easily perceptible-The Established Conclusion is as follows:-Smrti is more authoritative than Usage, because it is based directly upon the Veda; it leads directly to the inference of its corroborative Vedic-text; while in the case of Usage, the first necessary inference is that of the corroborative Smrti; and it is in support of this inferred Smrti text that the corroborative l'edic text is inferred; so that the support of the Veda for Usage is one step further removed than that in support of the Smrti itself. Then again, the Smrti has been compiled by persons well-known as steeped in Vedic lore, which fact lends strength to their work. In the case of Usage on the other hand, its exact source is always indefinite and unascertainable; which fact weakens its authority. (Tantravārtika-Trs., pp. 208–212.) There is yet another interpretation of Sutras 8 and 9 by Kumārila-(Tantravārtika-Trs., p. 212.) 
There are certain words which are found to signify one thing in the Vedic texts, and another thing in common parlance. Such words are (a) 'trivṛt'-in the Veda it is found to convey the idea of nine, while in common parlance it stands for three-fold;-- (b) 'charu'-in the Veda, denotes cooked Rice, while in common parlance it denotes the Saucer;-(c) 'Ashva-bala'-in the Veda, stands for Reed, while in common parlance, it stands for Horse- hair. The question is-In every one of such cases, which is the meaning that should be regarded as authoritative and right?— The Prima Facie View is that-" In as much as the two denota- tions are different, and as both are equally well-apprehended, the two significations should be regarded as equally right and hence to be treated as optional alternatives;-the sentence containing these words may be construed to convey either the one or the other of the two ideas; Or, in reality, as common parlance always comes to one's knowledge long before the reading of the Veda, the former should be regarded as having superior authority."-The Estab- lished Conclusion however is that that signification of the word which is based upon the Scriptures is decidedly the more authori- tative of the two; specially in the sphere of Dharma. (Tantra. l'a. Trs., pp. 212-216.) 
(H) WORDS CURRENT AMONG MLECHCHHAS. 
We find certain words-used even in the Veda,-regarding the exact signification of which we find no guidance in the scrip- 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
237 
tures; nor are they found to be current among the Aryas, in Aryavarta; they are found to be current among Mlechchhas, Foreigners. Such cases cannot be dealt with according to the conclusion arrived at in Sū. 9, as there is no 'usage' of the Arya available here. 
'Pika', 'Nema', 'Sata', 'Tamarasa' are the words cited in Bhāṣya (Trs., p. 103) in this connection. In regard to these, there arises the question-Of these words, are we to deduce their mean- ing from their Etymology, etc., with the help of Grammar and Lexicons? Or should we accept that as their meaning in which sense they are used among Mechchhas? (Bhasya). The second question to be considered is-Is greater authority to be attached to the meaning deduced from the Etymology of the word or to that indicated by usage among Mechchhas? (Tantravā. Trs., p. 217). 
The Prima Facie View on these questions is as follows:- "What has so far been established as authoritative and reliable is the usage of the Shista', the cultured people; hence in the case of the words cited, we should deduce some sort of meaning from their Etymology; and no reliance should be placed upon the meaning attached to them in the usage of uncultured people, who 
are not careful in the use of words. (Bhasya). And it follows from this that the meaning deduced from the Etymology of the word is to be accepted as more authoritative than that indicated by Mlechchha-usage; specially because even though this would be a newly-assumed signification, yet, as being based upon Scriptures (Grammatical), it must be held to be more authoritative and reliable. Further, in the first place, it may be possible to hunt- up Arya-usage itself in the vast land of Aryavarta, which is a well-defined tract. The recourse to Etymology and the Commen- taries and Lexicons would prove the usefulness of these works, which would not be very useful in connection with words whose meaning is already known directly through usage itself. Lastly, as Mlechchhas may not have any regard for Dharma, it is not unlikely that they may have purposely distorted the meanings of words. From all this the conclusion is that the words current in a certain sense among Mlechchhas, when used in the Veda or among Aryas, should not be taken in the sense attached to them in Mlechchha-usage,-their meaning should be deduced from their Etymology."238 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
The Established Conclusion on this question is as follows:- The meaning that has been imparted to a word, even by the Mechchha-would be duly comprehended and should be regarded as sanctioned by the authority of the l'eda; as it is not incongru- ous. (Su. 10). That is, the meaning that has been imparted to a word,--even by uncultured people,-though not known among cultured people,-would be comprehended, and it would not be right to reject what has been comprehended and which is not incompatible with any authority. Due authority may not attach to Mechchha-usage in matters relating to Dharma and other supersensuous things; but there are certain common things in regard to which the Mlechchhas are more expert and reliable than the Aryas-such things for instance, as the rearing and catching of birds. As regards the Lexicons and Commentaries, these will 
still have their use in the determining of the meaning of such words as are not known or understood even among Mlechchhas. Lastly, if the meanings of words are to be deduced from their Etymology, then there would be no certainty or definiteness attach- ing to their signification. The right conclusion is that in such cases, the usage of the Mlechchhas should be accepted; so that the word 'pika' should be taken to mean the Cuckoo,-the word 'nema' should be understood to mean half,-the word 'sata' in the sense of the round-topped wooden-vessel with a hundred holes,- and the word 'tamarasa' in the sense of Lotus; such being the usage among the Mlechchhas-(Bhāṣya, pp. 103-104.) 
While it is true that Arya-usage is more authoritative and reliable than Mechchha-usage, this does not mean that the latter is to be rejected even in cases where the former is not available at 
all. (Tantra-Va. Trs., p. 221.). Then again, Arya-usage is to be regarded as more reliable only in matters relating directly to Dharma; not necessarily in regard to worldly matters, such as Agriculture and the like; where all Established Usage is equally reliable. It is only in the case of words where we fail to find any usage at all-either among Aryas or among Mlechchhas,-that we would be compelled to have recourse to the assuming of their meanings through Etymological Explanations provided by the Nirukta and other works. Though such assumptions would be diverse and confused, yet they have to be accepted under certain circumstances. (Tantravārtika, Trs., p. 222.) 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
(I) AUTHORITY OF KALPA-SUTRAS, 
239 
Sutras 1-3. 11-14 consider the authoritative character of the body of Smpti-rules known under the name of 'Kalpa-Sutra.' A distinction is made between these and Smṛtis in general which have been dealt with before, on the ground that while the Kalpa-Sūtras 
formulate the rules of Sacrificial Procedure exactly as laid down in the Vedic texts still available, the Smetis in general are com- pilations based presumably upon Vedic texts, many of which are not now traceable, and whose existence can only be inferred. (See above). For this reason, the authority of the Kalpa-Suta as can- not be made to depend entirely upon the arguments adduced in support of the authority of Smrts in general. And yet the pre- sent discussion is necessary because even though the Kalpa-Sūtras contain nothing that cannot be found in the Vedic texts, yet as compilations, they are the work of human authors, and to this extent, their reliability is open to doubt. 
6 
Kumarila has explained the term Kalpa' in this connection as standing for the method and procedure of sacrifices in the form of definite regulations and treatises where these Rules are set forth in detail.' (Tantra-Va. Trs., p. 224.) 
Kumarila has evidently drawn a distinction between ' Kalpa and Kalpa-Sūtra'; as under 'Kalpa'—which contain the bare statement of the Rules, without any explanations and embellish- ments-he names as compilers, Baudhayana, Varaha and Mashaka; while as authors of the Sutras', he names Ashralāyana, Vaijavūpi, Dráhyāyaṇi, Latiya and Katyayana. The Bhasya (Trs., p. 105) has mentioned the name of Mashaka, Hastikan and Kaundinya, 
Kumarila justifies the separate treatment of Kalpa-Sutras on the following grounds:-Under the discussion on Smrtis in general, the chief argument against their authority lay in the fact of the Smytis not being based upon the l'eda; and this could not be urged against the Kalpa-Sutras, because the Vedic texts in support of these are directly available. For this reason they could not be dealt with along with Smytis in general. Then again, under the present Topic we are not going to discuss the authoritative character of the Kalpa-Sutra; because there can be no doubt on that point; all that we proceed to consider is-Is the authority of the Kalpa-Sutras independent and self-sufficient, like that of the Veda-or do they also derive their authority from the 
240 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Veda? As a matter of fact, as regards this question, the Smṛtis in general also may be included in the present Topic, just as the Kalpa-Sutras may be taken as included under the previous Topic dealing with Smptis in general. (Tantrava. Trs., p. 225.) 
The Prima Facie View in regard to the. Kalpa-Sutras is that they are as independent and self-sufficient in their authority as the Veda itself; and when they declare all days fit for the per- formance of Darsha-Sacrifice [while the l'eda has declared the Moonless Day alone as fit for it], it should be permissible to per- form the sacrifice on all days.-The Established Conclusion how- ever is that, in view of the fact that the Kalpa-Sutras only repeat in more intelligible language what is found to have been already mentioned in the Vedic texts still available, there can be no doubt regarding their authority and reliability; but at the same time, that authority and reliability cannot be self-sufficient; as such authority can belong only to such Scriptures as are independent of human authorship, which the Vedas alone are, and the Kalpa- Sutras are not. Says Prabhākara (Bṛhatī MS., p. 33b.): It is not possible that what proceeds from a human source should be self-sufficient in its authority, and it is well-known that the Kalpa-Sutra is the work of human authors.' 
- 
Ch- 
Kumārila has offered several other interpretations of these four Sutras 1.3.11-14. (a) Under the first of these, he has in- cluded the Smrti in general also under this Topic-as we have pointed out above, and has come to the comprehensive conclusion that No Smrti is self-sufficient in its authority-neither the Kalpa- 
Sūtras nor the Smrtis so-called. (b) Under another inter- pretation, he takes the Topic as referring to the Vedangas--the Subsidiary Sciences-Shikṣa, Kalpa, Vyakaraṇa, Nirukta, handas and Jyautiṣa. (c) Under yet another interpretation, the Topic is taken as referring to the so-called 'Smrtis' of the Buddha and others. He thus includes under these four Sutras 1.3.11-14, four questions-(1) Are the Kalpa-Sutras self-sufficient in their authority? (2) Are the Kalpa-Sutras and other Smrtis so self- sufficient?-(3) Are the Subsidiary Sciences so self-sufficient?- (4) Are the Buddhist and other heterodox Smṛtis so self-sufficient? 
With the (1) we have already dealt above. 
As regards (2) and (3)-the Prima Facie View is that real self-sufficient authority cannot be denied to them; because they 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
241 
have been universally accepted as Dharmashastra'-'Scripture dealing with Dharma'; which name includes Kalpa-Sūtra, Smṛtis 
and Vedangas. As a matter of fact also, nothing that is taught in these is contrary to or repugnant to any Vedic texts. These 
should therefore be regarded either as Veda itself or equal to Veda in authority. They are as eternal also as the Veda; as we cannot trace them to any beginning in time. The conclusion therefore must be that all these have an authority that is independent and self-sufficient, and they do not stand in need of the support and intercession of the Veda. (Tantra-Va. Trs., pp. 229-231.) The Established Conclusion on this Topic (as set forth in Tantra-Vă. Trs., pp. 237 et. seq.) is as follows:-In the case of all Smṛtis and Subsidiary Sciences,-in as much as we have distinct knowledge of their authors, they cannot be accepted as independent and self- sufficient Scriptures' bearing upon Dharma. The Blaṣya (Trs., p. 106) has advanced against the Kalpa-sutra, the fact that there is no 'accentuation' in it and hence it cannot be treated on the same footing as the Veda. Kumārila (Tantra-Va., p. 239) takes exception to this argument; he remarks-This argument would 
apply also to the case of the Mantras that are quoted in extenso in the Kalpas; as also to the Chhandogya-Brāhmaṇa texts prescribed in the Gyhya-Sutras,-which latter also would have to be denied real scriptural authority; because the eight Brahmanas with their esoteric Explanations, which are studied by the Sāmavedis, have got no definite accentuation and (according to the Bhasya) this absence of accentuation would deprive them of their 'Vedic' character. The only sound argument, according to Kumārila, against the self-sufficient authority of the Kalpa-Sutras, Smrtis and the Subsidiary Sciences, lies in the absence, in them, of the self-evident Eternality and independence of human agency-which are found pre-eminently in the Veda alone. (Tantra-Va. Trs., p. 239.) 
Similar should be the 
Kumarila proceeds to point out (p. 240) that though accord- ing to Katyayana's declaration-The Injunction, the Enjoined, the Argumentation of the Mīmāmsā. all constitute the Veda' though the name Veda becomes applicable to the Mimmsā, yet this has never been treated as l'eda proper. case with the works under consideration. Va. Trs., pp. 242-243) Kumārila has also cited an instance where what is stated in the Kalpa-Sutras, etc., is in conflict with the Veda. 
F. 31 
Under Su. 14 (Tantra- 
Sü. 
242 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
Now remains the fourth question included under the Topic, by which Kumārila (see above) has taken the Sutras 11-14 as bearing upon the authority of the So-called Smrti of the Buddha and others. 
The Prima Facie View on this question has been stated thus (in the Tantra-rārtika Trs., p. 232):-"Even though the teach- ings of Buddha and others may not be regular Smrti, yet it can- not be denied that they embody the 'Scripture of Action', 'Moral Code', 'Prayogasḥāstra' (Sū. 11); and in this character, these also may be regarded as 'Teda'. These scriptures also may be proved to be eternal by means of those same arguments that have been used to prove the Eternality of the l'eda itself; hence like the Veda, these also are self-sufficient in their authority. Again, being, like the Veda, not the work of a human author, they are free from all the defects due to that origin. Though it bears the name of Buddha' and other persons, that only shows that these persons have expounded the teachings, which themselves are Eternal-just as has been argued in regard to the names, 'Kathaka' and others found in the Veda. In fact, all the argu- ments that have been advanced in support of the self-sufficient authority of the Feda can be put forward in favour of the Buddhist and other Scriptures also." 
The Established Conclusion as contained in the Sutras is as follows: (Tantra-Va., Trs., pp. 232-237):-- 
By asserting the Eternality of his Scriptures, the Buddhist would go directly against his main thesis that all things are in a perpetual flur and there is nothing that is lasting. Thus being deprived of Eternality, these teachings must be dependent upon the trustworthy character of the Teachers themselves; and the word of any person cannot have independent authority in regard to matters relating to Dharma. The reason for this lies in 'as- anniyama' (Sū. 12)—i.e., in the fact of their declaration that all things are evanescent-or because they are full of incorrect words and expressions. 
(J) EXTENT AND SPHERE OF THE AUTHORITY OF CUSTOMS. Sutras 1.3.15-23 Holakādhikarana, 
Kumarila has established the authority of Custom and Usage— i.e., Practices of Good Men, under Sutra 1.3.7 (See above)-in 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
243 
a general way. The question raised and dealt with under Sü. 15-23 is in regard to the extent and sphere of the authority of Customs. 
As a matter of fact, it has been found that there are certain customs that are observed by Easterners'; there are others that are peculiar to the 'Southerners', and so forth. The question is-is 
the authority of these Customs limited and local, restricted to defi- nite localities-or is it universal, like that of the Veda? The idea underlying this discussion is that these Customs-if at all authori- tative, in howsoever a limited manner,-must owe that authority ultimately to Vedic texts;-it is argued therefore that if Customs 
have only local authority, then the Vedic texts upon which they may be based should also have only limited authority, and thus the very keystone of the Mimamsaka's position-the universal authority of the Veda-becomes shaken. The Established Conclu- sion on this question is as follows:-The Vedic Injunctions assum- ed in support of these Customs cannot be qualified by any speci- fications of time and place; firstly because the specifications generally spoken of are in such terms as among Easterners', 'among Southerners' and so forth; and these terms are purely relative; so that what is Eastern' for one man may be 'Western' 
for another, and secondly because the Customs in question are not found to be observed by all men of any limited area; nor are they found to be not observed by all persons of other areas. Says Prabhakara (Brhati. MS., p. 34):- 
"There being no fixity attaching to any specification, no limitation is possible. That there is no fixity is proved by the fact (1) that the Injunction (assumed in the Veda) cannot impose any such restriction, as all that an Injunction can do is to lay down 
that a certain act should be done, and (2) that the names of the Customs themselves, 'Holaka' and the rest, cannot indicate any such restriction, as all that they indicate is a certain Act;-and that (3) there is nothing else that could specify any place or time." 
Kumārila (Tantravārtika, Trs., p. 244) has taken these Sūtras as bearing upon the question of localised or universal authority of the Grhyasutras and such Smṛti-Sutras as those of Gautama, and 
the like. As a matter of fact, we find that bearing the Itihasas and Purāņas and the Smṛti of Manu, all other Smṛti-works,-such as 
244 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
those of Gautama, Vashistha, Shankha-Likhata, Harita, Apustumba, Baudhayana and others-as also the Sutras on Grhya, 
-are studied and followed exclusively by only certain sec- tions of Brahmanas, and each of them has its scope restricted to one particular Veda. For instance, the Sutras of Gautama and Gobhila are followed by the Chhandogya (Sama-Vedin) Brāhmaṇa only; those of lashistha, by the Ryvedins only; those of Shankha and Likhita, by the lajasaneyins; those of pastamba and Bandhayana, by the Krs-Yajurvedins. Thus the fact of the scope of these Sutras being limited affords matter for reflection; the question being-Is each of these Smṛti-Sutras authoritative only for the particular sect mentioned above? Or are all of them equally authoritative for all men? 
The Prima Facie View is as follows:-"These Sütras are, as a matter of fact, studied only by the said particular sects of Brāhmaṇas; hence their authority also must be restricted to those sects only." 
The Established Conclusion is that, on account of the univer- sal character of the Injunctions, the Smṛti-Sutras must be uni- versal (Sū. 16); that is, they must be authoritative for all men who may be capable of performing the duties laid down in them; and as a matter of fact, capacity to perform these duties belong to the people of all castes and customs inhabiting the whole country of Aryavarta, except the blind and such incapaciated persons who are excluded. Whenever an act is meant to be restricted in any way, such restriction is clearly mentioned-as, for instance, the Rājasūya sacrifice has been distinctly enjoined for the 'Raja' (Kṣattriya) only. 
C 
(K) GRAMMATICAL SMRTI ' 
Works dealing with Grammar also have been classed as 'Smrti.' The use and authority of these, as being upon Dharma, have been described under Sutras 1.3.24-29. 
Prabhakara has raised an objection against the introduction of this Topic. He says "What has the authoritative or un- 
authoritative character of the Grammatical Rules got to do with the authority of the Veda, which is the subject with which we are concerned? Even if the incorrect or corrupt forms of words-like 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
245 
'gavi' and the like-were really expressive and eternal, in what manner would that affect the Vedic Injunction ?" 
The answer to this that Prabhakara himself supplies is that, if there were no restrictions and regulations regarding the exact form in which words are denotative of things, then the compre- hension of the Vedic texts would remain vague and indefinite and there would be no certainty regarding a certain word being really expressive of a certain thing; and this vagueness and uncertainty would shake the authority and reliability of the Veda itself. The Rules of Grammar help us to determine in what form the word really expresses its meaning; and thus it helps us to obtain a definite and correct idea of the meaning of Vedic Texts. (Bṛhati, MS., p. 34.) 
· 
The question of this Topic, as propounded in the Bhagya (Trs., p. 112) is-Are, or are not, the corrupt vernacular forms of the word 'go' (Cow)-such as 'gari' 'goni'. ‘gopotalikā’—really expressive of the animal with the dewlap (i.c., the Cow),-in the same manner in which the correct (Sanskrit) form 'gauḥ' is? That is, is it only the one Sanskrit word, which has behind its use an unbroken tradition, that is rightly expressive of the animal, and all the rest are mere corrupt forms of it? Or are these also equally eternal and expressive? 
+ 
The Prima Facic View is as follows:-"They are all equally eternal and expressive. As a matter of fact, we find that the cor- rupt words also bring about the Cognition of the thing denoted, exactly in the same manner as the correct Sanskrit word. This shows that even a hundred years back, the expressive relationship between these words and the thing denoted was there; and so on and on; and this establishes their beginningless (eternal) character. Nor do we know of any creator or originator of this relation between the corrupt word and its denotation. From this it follows that all the words-the original Sanskrit as well as the corrupt Vernacular-are correct,-people should use them; because they all serve the purpose of expressing the meaning; and they are to be treated as synonymous, in the same manner as the synonymous Sanskrit words-'hasta', 'kara', 'pāņi' and the rest. In fact, all words are used for the definite purpose of expressing their meaning. Nor is there any Vedic Injunction regarding the use of words (Su. 24),-such as only the correct Sanskrit word 
246 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
should be used, and not the corrupt Vernacular word."-(Bhāṣya, Trs. pp. 112-113.) 
The Tantravārtika sets forth the Prima Facic View in a very elaborate form, covering full forty pages-(Trs., pp. 259—299.) The main points made in this elaborate presentation are the following:-(1) Gāri' and such other Vernacular corruptions are as expressive as the Sanskrit word 'Gauḥ';-(2) the corrupt forms are as correct as the original Sanskrit;-(3) the Vernacular form is not a corruption at all; it is as peceptible by the Ear as any correct word;-(4) they are all-the original Sanskrit and the Vernacular-equally eternal; it is not possible to trace any begin- ning in time for either (5) no transcendental result can follow from the use of the so-called Sanskrit form; as the use of this also serves the only purpose of expressing the meaning; specially because such use does not form the subject of Vedic Injunction;- 
(6) Grammar cannot be regarded as a 'shastra', 'Scripture'; be- cause works on the subject are not found to bear the form of the Veda; in fact, the explanations provided by the Science of Gram- mar do not differ in any way from the ordinary explanation of vernacular words;-(7) The Science of Grammar cannot derive its authority from the Veda; as it does not treat of Action, which alone forms the subject-matter of the Veda proper; (8) Grammar cannot be regarded as an integral part of the Veda; as it is not found to serve any useful purpose in matters relating to Dharma; specially in the matter of expressing their meanings, the words of the Veda do not stand in need of the Rules of Grammar;-(9) the ordinary usage of words cannot be based upon Grammar; as Grammar itself proceeds entirely on the basis of Usage itself. (Tantra-Va., Trs., p. 298.) 
There are some portions of this elaborate presentation of the Prima Facie View in the Tantracārtika which are specially interesting. 
It takes up verbatim a number of Vedic texts which support the idea of Grammar being the means of accomplishing Dharma. (1) The first text quoted is the one where it has been declared that 
A single word, correctly used, becomes the means of fulfilling all desires in Heaven and on Earth.'-But in reality this is a praise of Vedic Study, and has no bearing upon the Science of 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
( 
C 
247 
Grammar. (2) The second text quoted is that where it is said that 'the Brahmana should not behave like the Mlechchha',-where 'behaving like the Mlechchha' has been taken to stand for the using of corrupt forms of words.' But this text only prohibits the distorting of the traditional reading of the Vedic text. (3) The third text quoted is that- If one performing the Agnihotra happens to utter an Apashabda, he shall perform the Sarasvati- Iașți, in expiation of this',-where ‘apashabda' has been taken to mean corrupt or wrong word.' But this lays down the Expia- tory Rite only as to be performed by one who happens to tell a lie, or distort a Vedic text, or to pronounce a word of foreign origin, and it has nothing to do with the uttering of words not sanctioned by the comparatively modern rules of Grammar." (Tantra-Vă, Trs., 269-270.) 
6 
"The greatest authorities on the Science of Grammar are found to have made use of ungrammatical words and expressions; even in the works of Panini, Katyayana and Patanjali, we meet with many ungrammatical expressions. For instance,-(a) we have the Sutra (Pāṇini 1.4.30)-Janikaruth prakṛtih'; where we find two grammatical mistakes: (1) the term 'jani' stands for the root 'jan' (to produce); and it is in connection with the 'karta' (creator) of this root that the Sutra evidently prescribes the use of the Ablative Ending; which is absurd; as the said ending can be attached to the term-not to the creator of it. (2) The second 
mistake in this Sutra is that the compound ‘Janikartuḥ' itself is ungrammatical; as it is a direct infringement of Panini's Sūtra 2.2.15, which lays down that there can be no compounding with nouns ending in 'trch' and 'aka' affixes; and here we have the com- pounding of the term 'karty' which contains the 'trch' affix. In Kātyāyana's Vārtika also, we meet with the sentence जातिवाचकत्वात् सिद्धम् ; where the compound is ungrammatical,- being an infringement of Panini's Sutra 2.2.15; as the term 'Vāchaka' ends in the 'aka' affix and as such is uncompoundable under the said Sutra. In Patanjali's Bhāṣya also, we meet with the expression fafa; which is an Tatpuruşa compound con- taining within itself a Dvandva compound; the whole compound being expounded as अविश्च श्रविकश्च 'अविरविको 'अविरविकयोः न्यायेन श्रविरविकन्यायेन; and in this it was absolutely necessary to delete in the former compound the Nominative Termination in aviḥ', 
M248 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
in accordance with Panini's Su. 2.4.71; but this has not been done. The correct form of the expression would be youfaradA. 
"As regards the uses of the Science of Grammar, the Mahā- bhāṣya has described several uses, the chief of which are रक्षा-गृह- आगम - लघु – सन्देह. These have been thus explained :—(a) Preservation, of the Veda. It is argued that the text of the Veda. 
is preserved, guarded, against corruption, by the laws of Gram- mar.-As mar. As a matter of fact however, what really preserves the Vedic texts is the work of the teachers and their pupils. The Vedic texts or their order of sequence have nothing to gain from Grammar; they have been preserved from corruption so far by the care and devotion and the strict discipline under which it is read and studied. (b) The second use ascribed to Grammar is Cha, 
'Conjectural Modification';-for example, there is a Mantra used in offering, which contains the name of the substance offered-Friki- corn for instance; when the same Mantra comes to be used in con- nection with an offering, where the substance offered is Nirara- corn, not Trihi-then the relevant word in the Mantra is modi- fied', changed; (vide Mimämsä-Su. 9.3.1-2). It has been argued by the Grammarian that the exact form of this 'modification' can be determined only with the help of Granimar. As a matter of fact however, the rules of Grammar do not help in this matter at all; the exact form of the modification is determined by other means, through the Veda itself. In fact the rules of Grammar, having been made by men, can never have an authority in matters relating to Dharma in general, and to the Veda tert in particular. (c) The third use ascribed to Grammar is 'agama' 'scripture'; and what is meant is that Grammar has been included under 'scrip- tures', where the 'Scripture' has been defined as including the 'Six Subsidiaries' and Grammar is one of these Six. In reality, however, Grammar has no claim to be regarded as one of the 'Six Subsidiary Sciences'; and when the 'Scriptures' are described as containing the Six Subsidiaries', what are meant 
are the Six Means of Interpretation, consisting of (1) Shruti (Direct Asser- tion), (2) Linga (Indicative Word), (3) Fakya (Syntactican Con- nection), (4) Prakarana (Context), (5) Sthana (Order of Sequence' and (6) Samakhya (Name), and not Shikṣā, Kalpa and the rest. The Vedic Injunction which enjoins the study of the 'Six Subsi diaries' distinctly asserts that such study does not bring about any Results; hence the assertion in the Mahabhāṣya that the 
( 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
249 
to 
knowledge of Grammar is Dharma'; or the assertion of Katyāyana that 'the using of words in accordance with the Rules of Grammar brings prosperity'-cannot but be rejected as being contrary to the said Vedic Injunction. (d) The Fourth use attributed Grammar is mentioned as 'Laghu'; which means that Grammar helps to simplify the process of differentiating the correct from the incorrect forms of words. This claim is entirely unfounded; as a matter of fact all that Grammatical works do is to point out the forms of words that are already known, and they do this by means of an endlessly complicated process of queer roots and affixes and terminations. And yet there 
And yet there are very few students who can rightly apply all this elaborate process to words when actually using them. Thus instead of 'simplifying', Grammar tends only to confound and complicate the use of words. (e) The fifth use claimed for Grammar is spoken of as Asandeha', which is taken to mean that Grammar helps in removing doubts relating to the exact meaning of Vedic texts. This claim also is not well founded; because Grammar does not in any way help us to ascer- tain the meaning of words or sentences; in fact it deals merely with the verbal form of words and has no bearing on their exact signification. 
"The Mahabhāṣya has quoted a number of Vedic texts which, it explains, indicate the usefulness of Grammar. But every one of them is capable of other and more rational explanations. For instance, the Vedic text speaks of 'the four kinds of speech, which alone are used by learned Brāhmaṇas', and this has been taken as referring to the four kinds of words-Nouns, Verbs, 
Prefixes and Nipatas; and it has been argued that the right knowledge of these can be obtained only through Grammar. a matter of fact however the 'four kinds of speech' stands for the four forms, or stages of speech-Para, Pashyanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari. 
As 
"Thus then, Grammar is found to consist in random and contradictory statements, and to be devoid of any basis in the Veda; and as such it is entirely useless. 
"Grammar thus being found to be useless, there can be no point in regulating our usage of words according to the rules of Grammar. Hence the conclusion is that all the words-the original Sanskrit as well as the corrupt Vernacular-can equally 
F. 32 
250 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
express things and ideas and hence one or the other may be used 
optionally." 
-- 
In answer to the above Prima Facie View the Established Con- clusion is as follows, as embodied in Sutras 25-29: The view that all the words in question-Sanskrit and Vernacular-are similar words having the same meaning and all have an un- broken tradition behind them, is not correct. Because such a view can be held only on the strength of the fact that we find all of them even the corrupt Vernacular ones-bringing about the cognition of the things denoted. But this phenomenon can be explained as coming about through the correct Sanskrit word it- self, which is recalled to the mind by its similarity to the corrupt Vernacular word pronounced. That is, for instance, when the Vernacular word ‘gāvē' is pronounced, it brings to our mind the correct Sanskrit word 'Gauḥ', which latter in its turn, brings about the cognition of the animal denoted. Thus the conclusion is that among all these words, there is only one-the correct Sanskrit word 'Gauḥ'-which is Eternal and really expressive. In case of the several Sanskrit synonyms-like the words 'hasta', 'kara,' 'pāni—the connection of every one of these with the denotation is equally eternal; such being the teaching of authoritative teachers, according to whom all these words are grammatically correct, while the Vernacular words like 'gavi', 'yoni', etc., are not gram- matically correct. (Su. 26 and Bha. Trs., p. 113.) 
On this point, the truth can be ascertained only through close attention, and through the application of certain general prin- ciples (Su. 27). The number of words being endless, it is not possible to read up and collect all of them; hence for the purpose of indicating all correct word-forms, the only means that we have at our command is the laying down of certain broad general prin- ciples and definitions that would take in all the correct word-forms. 
It is exactly this that is done by the Science of Grammar; while this is of great use to us in the ascertaining of both correct and incorrect words. It is not as has been supposed that the expres- siveness of words is dependent upon Grammar. As a matter of 
fact, this expressiveness of words is actually cognised in day to day experience; and it is only when it is found that correct and in- correct words have been mixed up in usage, that the Grammatical Rules step in to help us in distinguishing the correct word from its corruptions. (Tantra-Va, Trs., p. 305). As a matter of fact, 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
251 
(a) we cannot think of any point of time when the grammatical laws did not exist;-(b) we find Vedic texts supplying the requi- site basis for all the six Elements of Grammar-viz., (1) the Etymology of words, (2) correct word-forms, (3) injunctions to use only correct words, (4) actual use of such words, (5) prohibition of incorrect word-forms, and (6) avoidance, in practice, of such word-forms. All these therefore are accepted as being beginning- less. Then again, common people are unable to distinguish the expressive from the inexpressive word; and it is only the Rules of Grammar that can help us to do this. Thus both Grammar and Usage conjointly enable us to find out the truly expressive word. And in cases where there is conflict betwen Usage and Grammatical Rules, the latter has to be regarded as superior; because as Smṛti it is more authoritative than Usage, (see above).-(Tantra-Va. Trs., pp. 306-307.) 
It is not fair to deny to Grammar the title of Shastra', 'Scripture', when, in its commonly accepted conventional sense, this term includes all the fourteen Sciences, Vidyas, among whom Grammar is also included. Being a Shastra', Grammar stands on the same footing as "Smpti'; hence its authoritative character can- not be denied. (Ibid., p. 317.) 
As declared in the Vartika (of Katyayana), the use of Gram- mar lies in the laying down of certain restrictions which help in the fulfilling of Dharma; the two restrictions laid down by it are: (1) that one should use only correct forms of words, the knowledge and using of such words leading the person to Heaven; this is a restriction which is laid down in the Veda also; and (2) that such and such words are correct; this restriction occurring in Grammar alone. (Ibid., p. 319.) 
(L) WORDS IN THE VEDA ARE THE SAME AS THOSE IN ORDINARY USAGE. 
Sutras 1.3. 30-35. 
The correctness of the Word is to be ascertained with the help of Grammar. But what we are concerned with is what is it that. the word expresses. In a rough manner we know what is expressed by words in our common parlance. But we are considering the means of knowing Dharma; and the Veda and Smrti have been found to be the reliable source of information on this point. In 
乘 
252 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
order to find out therefore the exact meaning of Veda and Smrti texts, we have to see what is the exact denotation of words. This we have already discussed under Verbal Cognition, where we have seen that what the word denotes is the Universal or Class. This is one part of the Topic discussed under Su. 30-35. But as a preliminary to this it has been considered whether the word found in the Veda, and the meaning expressed by it there are the same as in common parlance. This is necessary because the conclusion that words denote Universals has been deduced from facts of common experience, whose bearing upon Veda and upon Dharma is open to question. 
The question thus to be considered is-(a) Are the words found in the Veda the same as those used in common parlance or differ- ent? (b) Are they denotative of the same things as in common parlance? (Bhāṣya Trs.. p. 116.) 
The Prima Facie l'iew is that the words and their meanings in the Veda must be different from those in common parlance. Because they are named differently and their forms also are differ- ent. The words in the Veda are named 'raidika' while others are 
called 'laukika';-in the Veda we find that the word 'Agni' de- notes Indra and as such must be different from the word 'agni' denoting Fire in common parlance;-similarly we find the Veda speaking of deva-go'-the Cow of the Heaven-moving on its back; this 'go' therefore must be different from the ordinary cow which moves on its legs; and so on in several cases. (Bhāṣya Trs., p. 116.) 
C 
The Established Conclusion is that the words in the Veda must be the same as those in common parlance and the things 
expressed by them also must be the same; because thus alone are Injunctions possible-says Su. 30. If the two sets of words and their meanings were different then we could not understand the Vedic Injunctions, which thus would fail in their purpose. An- other reason is that as a matter of fact there is no differentiation between the two sets of words (Sūtra). That is, we do not perceive any difference between the words in the Veda and those in common parlance; similarly we find the same meaning denoted by both. As for the few stray instances cited above, they can be easily explained. (Bhāṣya Trs., p. 117). 
CHAP. XXI: SMRTI ETC. 
253 
Kumarila is not satisfied with the limited scope given to the Topic by the manner in which the Prima Facie View has been set forth in the Bhasya; by this the usefulness of the whole Topic becomes very much circumscribed. He therefore states the Prima 
Facie View as follows:-"In as much as we find that the words of the Veda differ from those of common parlance, on the points- (1) that the formers are to be read in a prescribed manner of accentuation, etc., not so the latter, (2) that the verbal forms of the words and sentences in the Veda are irrevocably fixed, while the latter are variable.-(3) that the names and forms of the two are different.-we conclude that all the words used in the Veda are entirely different from those in common parlance." (Tantra-Vă. Trs., p. 326.) 
The form of the Established Conclusion however remains the same as before-that the words used in the Veda, as also the things denoted by them, are the same as those in common parlance. (Ibid.) 
On p. 353 (Trs.) Kumarila has emphasised his view that the difference between the two sets must be held to be based upon accentuation and such other details,-not upon denotations. 
CHAPTER XXII 
WHAT ARE THE ACTS THAT CONSTITUTE DHARMA' ? 
(A) INTRODUCTORY. 
In Discourse 1, Jaimini has dealt with the Means of knowing Dharma,-what should be done. Firstly, it has been shown that the Vedic Injunction is the best and most directly reliable Means of knowing it;-secondly that the character of such Means belongs -somewhat remotely,-also to the Declamatory Vedic Texts, the Vedic Mantra-Texts, the Vedic Names, as also to Smrti, and Usage. Thus the first discourse has supplied the full answer to the question-'What are the reliable Means of obtaining Know- ledge of Dharma? In answering this question in detail, it has also been shown that the true character of Dharma belongs to such actions as (a) the Agnihotra and the like-which are directly enjoined in the Vedic Injunctive texts,-(b) the Aṣṭaka and the like, which are laid down in the Smrti,-(c) the Hólāka and the like, as established by Usage and Custom, and so forth. 
But so far, these few actions have been mentioned only by way of illus- tration, bringing out the general principles of interpretation there- in discussed; and the detailed consideration of the particular character of the enjoined acts was left over for the second Discourse. 
Thus the second Discourse supplies the detailed answer to the second question-'What are the acts that constitute Dharma?' 
It is necessary now to consider what enjoined Acts are Primary and what are Secondary or Subsidiary; and to this end, it is neces- sary to consider what Acts are different and what non-different: this is the subject-matter-none other of the Second Discourse. (Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 167.) 
On this Kumārila (Tantra-Va. Trs., p. 467) has the follow- ing remarks: What is explained in the present Discourse is that one Action is known to be different from another on account of the two being mentioned by two different words;-and it is in the 
254 
CHAPTER XXII: WHAT ACTS CONSTITUTE DHARMA 
255 
wake of difference among the Acts that we have an explanation of difference among the Apurvas resulting from the Acts; and lastly, it is for ascertaining which is the Action that brings about the Apurva that we have the consideration 
consideration of divi- sion of Actions into 'Primary' and 'Secondary' or 'Subsidiary'. That is to say, (1) Difference among Actions is the natural direct subject-matter of the Discourse;-(2) with a view to establish this difference among Actions, it is necessary to consider the question of difference among the Apurvas brought about by the Actions;— (3) thus far it might appear that all Acts bring about Apūrvas; hence comes the necessity of differentiating among Actions, as to which are Primary and which Subsidiary, because as a general principle the Jpūrva is brought about by the Primary Act. This matter of Primary and Subsidiary acts has been dealt with only briefly in this Discourse; its detailed consideration forms the sub- ject-matter of the Third Discourse. 
Prabhākara, ever anxious to turn all discussions to the Vedic text itself, propounds the question in the form-What are the several texts that enjoin the several acts constituting Dharma?— According to him therefore, the subject-matter of the present Discourse consists of difference among the texts enjoining the several acts, not the difference among the Acts themselves;- these latter being regarded as different clearly on the ground of the different texts enjoining them. 
The above view of Prabhakara has been criticised by the followers of Kumārila, according to whom the subject-matter of the Discourse consists directly of Difference among Actions them- selves, and the other matters that come in are only those that are directly or indirectly connected with that same subject. 
Before proceeding with this main subject of Difference among Actions, the Sutra deals with certain matters whose consideration is essential for that main question. We have seen how the main point that may mark out one Action as different from another is the Apurra or Transcendental Effect resulting from them. A preliminary enquiry therefore is necessary on the following ques- tions:-(1) Is there any such thing as the said Apurva? (This is dealt with under Su. 5)-(2) Which is the particular word in the Injunctive text to which the Apurva resulting from the enjoined Act is related? (This is dealt with under Sūtras 1-4), (3) Divi- 
256 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
sion of Actions into Primary and Subsidiary. (Dealt with under Sû. 6-8). 
(B) APŪRVA. 
As regards question (1)-Is there any such thing as Apurva- it has been dealt with under Su. 2.1.5, which starts off with the Established Conclusion-There is Apurva because Action is enjoined'-leaving the Prima Facie Vier represented by the question itself. 
The Established Conclusion has been thus explained in the Bhāṣya (Trs., p. 175). There must be such a thing as Apurva,- because Action is enjoined-in such injunctions as 'Desiring Heaven, one should perform Sacrifice.' If there were no such thing as Apurea, such an injunction would be meaningless ; because the Sacrifice itself is something perishable,-and if it were to perish without bringing into existence something else, then the Result, in the shape of 'Heaven', could never come about. From this it follows that the act of Sacrifice does bring about something -some Force or Potency-which continues to exist and operate till the final Result-Heaven'-is accomplished. The act of Sacrifice itself cannot and does not continue to exist after it has itself been accomplished; and because the Act is perishable, it must be taken as bringing into existence some such Potency as 'Apurva' which leads on to the Result. (Bhaṣya) 
The Prima Facie View on this question has been thus ela- borated by Prabhākara (Bṛhatī, MS., p. 47B)—"The Injunction imparted by the Injunctive Word only urges the Agent to the performance of a certain action, and not towards anything desired by him the Action is something ephemeral, and cannot be present immediately before the attainment of the result by the Agent; hence, in order to meet these difficulties, we must accept the Sacrifice itself to be either everlasting, or capable of bringing about a certain potency or faculty in the Agent, or the favours of the Deity, and there can be no justification for assuming any such thing as Apurva." 
In answer to the above Prima Facie View, Prabhakara con- tinues-At the very outset you commit a mistake in assuming that the Injunctive Word prompts the Agent to Action: while what 
CHAPTER XXII: WHAT ACTS CONSTITUTE DHARMA 
257 
the Injunction really does is to prompt him to Activity or Exer- tion; and the particular act denoted by the root of the Injunctive Word is only the object of that Activity or Exertion. Thus then, what is denoted by the Injunctive Sentence is the 'Niyoga', the Mandatory Force, this Mandate prompts the man to Exertion pertaining to some sort of action denoted by the verbal root. The assumption that the Act itself is everlasting is contrary to all evidence. The Soul also, by its very omnipresence, must be inactive; hence the immediate cause of the Result cannot be some- thing abiding in the Soul. 
The whole of this matter has been put clearly, from the Prabhakara point of view, in the Prakaraṇapañchikā (pp. 185 et. seq.); from which we learn as follows:- 
There can be no doubt as to the evanescent character of the Sacrifice itself; it is borne out by common experience. Nor can the Sacrifice be regarded as laid down for the purpose of securing the favours of the Deity, as there is no evidence to support this idea. As a matter of fact also, Sacrifices are never performed for that purpose; the Deity is there only as a hypothetical Entity postulated as the recipient of the Sacrificial Offering; and there can be no pleasing or displeasing of such an Entity. Nor can we accept the view that the verbal root with the Injunctive Affix expresses an Action tending to produce, in the Agent, a certain Faculty which is the immediate cause of the final result. Though this is the view favoured by Kumarila, it has not been accepted by Prabhakara, as there is no reason for the postulating of any such Faculty in the Agent. That the Act of Sacrifice produces any such Faculty in the Agent is not proved either by Perception or by Inference, or even by Scripture,-there being no Vedic text asserting such a Faculty. Specially as we find that the act (of Sacrifice) is brought about by the Exertion (or Activity) of the Agent; and therefore the causal potency must reside in this Exertion, which Exertion, therefore, should be what is expressed by the Injunctive Word. The appearance of the Faculty in ques- tion might be said to be proved by Presumption, based upon the consideration that the Action cannot be the cause of the Final Result, without some such Faculty lasting during the time interven- ing between the completion of the Act and the appearance of the Result. But what this Presumption can point to is only some such Faculty in the Act itself, not in the Acting Agent, 
F. 33258 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
The whole matter of this 'Apūrva' and 'Niyoga' is thus ex- pounded in Prakaranapañchika (p. 187); Sutra 1.1.2 has shown that what the Injunctive Sentence denotes is the 'Kārya', some- thing to be effected;-(2) in the beginning of Discourse VI, the Sūtra has shown that, of this Kārya, denoted by the Injunctive Sentence, the Niyojya,―i.e., the person prompted to effect or bring about that Karya,-is one who is desirous of acquiring for himself some desirable result in the shape of Heaven or some such thing, which is thus related to the said Karya;-(3) in the Bādaryādhikaraṇa (Sū. 3.1.3) it has been proved that it is the Karya that is the direct cause of the appearance of the Desirable Result, which is desired by, and hence qualifies, the prompted person(4) in the Deratadhikaraṇa (S. 9.1.9), the Bhasya has shown that the Karya, which is to be effected is not the act; as the Act can never be the Direct cause of the Desired Result; nor coud it be held to lead to the Result through the favour of the Deity to whom the Sacrifice is offered; nor can it be regarded as leading to the Result through a certain potency in the Agent him- self; and yet it is well-known that either the Act itself, or some Potency subsisting therein, does not last long enough to bring about the Result directly. (5) In the Apūrvadhikaraṇa (2.1.5), we have the final conclusion led up to by all the above Adhi- karanas viz., That which is denoted by the Injunctive affix is the 'Kārya'-something to be effected-which inheres in the Agent, the person prompted by the Injunction, in relation to whom the said 'Kārya' is indicated;-as this 'Karya' is not cognisable by any of the ordinary Means of Knowledge, it has been called ‘Apūrva', something new, not known before. The connection of this 'Kārya' with the Agent and the Action (of Sacrifice, for instance) may be thus traced:--The 'Karya' by its very nature is something brought about by Krti or operation,-and this operation is none other than the Exertion of the Agent. In the Bhävarthadhikaraṇa (2.1.1) again, it is shown that no such Exertion is possible inde- pendently of some act denoted by the verbal root. Thus what the Injunctive Sentence denotes in this connection is the Niyoga, prompting or mandate, relating to that Act. This Act, thus being the object of the Prompting, comes to be spoken of as the 'Instru- ment' by which that Prompting is accomplished, as shown under Su. 3.1.3. Even though the said Karya is brought into existence at a time other than the appearance of the final Result, yet, in as 
CHAPTER XXII: WHAT ACTS CONSTITUTE DHARMA 
259 
much as it is inseparably related to the Prompted Agent,—in whom the desire for the Result subsists,-there is nothing incon- gruous in regarding that Karya as the direct cause of the Final Result. This 'Kārya' has been called 'Apurva' by the Bhāṣya, by reason of its being something new to all other Means of Know- ledge, save the Injunctive Sentence. The name given to it by Prabhakara is 'Niyoga' Prompting, Mandatory Force, on account of the fact that it acts as an incentive to the prompted person (Niyojya) and makes him put forth an Exertion towards the action. denoted by the verbal root contained in the Injunctive Word. This 'Karya' or 'Niyoga' is denoted, neither by the verbal root, nor by the Injunctive Affix, nor by any other single word in the Injunctive Sentence; it is denoted by that Sentence as a whole. All other necessary factors being expressed by the several words in the Sentence,-what the Sentence as a whole denotes is the said Niyoga or Mandatory Force as related to the Prompted Person denoted by some other word in the Sentence,-mentioning the Result, the desirer of which is the Prompted Person. That the Niyoga or Prompting is thus expressed by the Sentence as a whole is also proved by the fact that the general rule is that, that which is the principal factor made known by the Sentence constitutes the 'meaning' of that Sentence; and there is no doubt that of all the factors made known by the Sentence, the said Niyoga or Promp- ting is the most important. Even though the Final Result has all the appearance of the most important factor, yet it is the Niyoga that is really so; and the Result also has to be regarded as subservient to the Niyoga, in view of the fact that the Result comes in as one of the factors necessary for the making up of the full Niyoga. That is to say, the Viyoga cannot be true Niyoga or Prompting until there is a Niyojya, the Person Prompted to Exertion; as unless there is Exertion, the Niyoga does not attain its full character; then again without the Agent, there can be no exertion;—and lastly, it is only the Person desiring the Result issuing from the Action who is entitled to its performance. Thus indirectly, through the Agent, the Result becomes a necessary factor in the Niyoga itself. This relation between the Niyoga and the Result is similar to that between the Master and the Servant; without the 'Servant', the master cannot be a true 'master', and yet it is the Master who is the more important person of the two. 
260 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
The Prakaraṇapañchikā raises an interesting question here:- "The Niyoga, the Prompting or Mandatory Force, is an effect; hence it must be evanescent, like the Action itself; if then the Action cannot be the direct cause of the Result, on account of its evanescence, then the same may be said of the Niyoga also." 
This same objection applies to the Apurva also, as propounded by the Bhutta. The author himself is unable to provide a satis- factory answer. All that he says is that the Niyoga or Prompting does not bring about the Result, immediately on its own appear- ance; in its action towards the bringing about of the Result, it stands in need of certain auxiliaries which are not always avail- able; and until the appearance of these auxiliaries the Result can- not appear. This explanation does not meet the difficulty that the Niyoga itself cannot, and does not, exist at the time that the Result appears. He has explained in another place that it is through the Prompted Agent that the Niyoga, appearing at the present time, brings about the Result at a future time. This however is as much as to say that the Niyoga produces something in the Agent, which something brings about the Result. This would practically be the Bhaṭṭa view, by which the Action produces a certain Faculty or Potency, in the Agent which Faculty leads to the Final Result. In fact, the Prabhakara assumes a Niyoga intervening between the Result and the Something lasting produced by the Niyoga, he does not call it Faculty', 'Samskara', like Kumārila; but it comes to the same thing. Shalikanatha has tried to meet the difficulty by calling in the aid of Adṛṣṭa, Destiny; he says that it is only when the Niyoga is aided by Adrsta, Destiny; that it brings the Final Result. 
Another question arising in this connection is that, what has been said above may be all right so far as those acts are concerned which have been enjoined as leading to desirable results, but how would it apply to those which have been enjoined as compulsory, without reference to any results, or to those that have been forbid- den,-i.e., whose non-performance has been enjoined? The ans- wer to this is that in the exposition of the Niyoga, the desire for the Result has been brought in only as something whose presence in the Agent enables and entitles him to perform the Act. In the case of those actions that have been enjoined as compulsory, as to be performed throughout life,-any person who is endowed with 
CHAPTER XXII: WHAT ACTS CONSTITUTE DHARMA 
261 
life, is entitled to the performance of the acts; so that the title and character of the Agent become duly accomplished; and this is all that is necessary 
is necessary for the Explanation of the 
Niyoga. 
- 
Under Kumārila's view (Tantra-Va. Trs. p. 504), the Apurva is 'a potency, in the Principal Action, or in the Agent, which did not exist prior to the performance of that Action, and whose exist ence is proved by the authority of the Scriptures'. Before their performance, there is in the Sacrifices themselves, in the first in- stance, an incapacity to lead any one to Heaven,-and in the second place, in the Agent, an incapacity to attain Heaven;-both these in- capacities become set aside by the performance of the Sacrifice;— this performance also produces a Potency or Capacity by virtue of which Heaven is attained;-to this capacity, we apply the name Apurva. The proof of the existence of such an Apurva lies in Pre- sumption, based upon the fact that without some such Capacity or Potency, Vedic texts are wholly inexplicable. For instance, there are many Vedic texts asserting that certain Sacrifices lead the Sacrificer to Heaven; the idea being that he goes to Heaven, not indeed im- mediately on the completion of the Sacrifice, but after the perfor- mer's death. The question then arises that, as a general rule, the Effect comes into existence either while its Cause is still present, or immediately after the Cause has ceased to exist; but in the case in question, the Sacrifice ceases to exist at the present moment, while the attainment of Heaven comes ten or twelve or more years later. This can be explained only by the hypothesis that the Sac- rifice, on its completion, produces directly a certain potency or faculty in the Agent, which resides in him, like several other facul- teis, throughout life, at the end of which it leads him to Heaven. Without some such intervening Potency or Faculty,- as the connecting link between the Sacrifice and its Result-the causal relation between these two cannot be explained. Apurva thus is nothing more than a Force set in motion by the Action of Sacrifice, this Force being the Direct Instrument whereby, sooner or later, the Action brings about the Result. There is nothing incongruous in this hypothesis; as every action is found to set going certain forces, either in a substance, or in persons connected with the Substance; and the Force thus set going brings about the Result, as soon as it reaches its full development with the aid of attendant auxiliaries. 
262 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
This whole process is thus systematically stated in the Nyāyamālā-vistara:— 
(1) The Sentence-'One desiring Heaven should perform Sacrifices' lays down the fact that the act of Sacri- fice is instrumental in the bringing about of the attainment of Heaven. 
(2) Then there arises the question-How can the Sacrifice, which ceases to exist at the moment that its perform- 
ance is complete, bring about the Result, at a much later time? 
(3) The answer to this is that the Sacrifice brings about the Final Result through the Agency of the Force called 'Apūrva'. 
(4) A further question arises-How is this Apurva brought 
into existence? 
(5) The answer is-By the performance of the Sacrifice. 
In all simple sacrifices there is a single purra bringing about a single Result. But there are crtain elaborate Sacrifices which are highly complex, being made up of a number of Subsidiary Sacrifices; such for instance, as the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa Sacrifice. In all such Sacrifices, there are as a rule, four kinds of Apūrva: (1) The Phalapurva, the Productive Potency, that which leads to the Result directly, and as such, is the immediate cause of the Result; (2) the Samudayapurva, the Collective Force;-in the Darsha-Purnamasa Sacrifices the three main Sacrifices performed on the Moonless day form one group, and the three performed on the Full-Moon day, another group; each of these two groups, occur- ring at different points of time, could not have a single Apūrva; hence each group should have a distinct Apurva of its own,-the two Apurvas combining to produce the final Phalapūrva;-each of these two distinct Apüreas is called 'Samudāyāpūrva', 'Collective Apúrva',-as brought about by a group of three Sacrifices. (3) The Utpattyapūrva,-'Initial Apürra'; i.e., the three Apurvas fol- lowing from each of the three Sacrifices constituting the first group of the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa, and the three following from the three. Sacrifices constituting the second group. (4) Angupürva-Each of these Sacrifices is made up of a number of minor acts, each of which, in its turn, brings about an Apurva of its own, through which it helps the main Sacrifice in bringing about its Result. 
CHAPTER XXII: WHAT ACTS CONSTITUTE DIARMA 
263 
(C) To WHAT WORD IS THE APURVA RELATED? The second question is-Which is the particular word in the Injunctive text to which the Apurva resulting from the enjoined act is related, and which would, on that account, indicate the difference or non-difference among the Apurvas, and thence also among the Acts themselves? This question has been dealt with under Su. 2. 1. 1-4. 
The. Bhasya (Trs. p. 168) begins with a preliminary enquiry; the question being-Is a different Dharma enjoined by each one of the words in the Injunctive text? Or is a single Dharma en- joined by the Sentence as a whole?--The Prima Facie View is that "A distinct Dharma is enjoined by each one of the words." -The Established Conclusion is that one text enjoins only one Dharma as bringing about the Apurva. 
Then the question arises-Which is that one word which lays down Dharma and to which the resultant Apurva is related? Is it related to the Nouns (denoting Substances and Qualities)? or to Verbs (denoting Actions)? The answer to this question is con- tained in the Bhārārthadhikarana of the Sūtras (2.1.1-4). The Prima Facie View is that the Apurva is related to both Nouns and Verbs. The Established Conclusion is as follows:-That the re- sultant cannot be related to the Noun follows from the very nature of Nouns; Nouns are the names of things that are already accom- plished entities, and do not stand in need of anything else,-being self-sufficient themselves (Su. 3). That word, on the other hand, to which the Resultant is related must be something that is yet to be accomplished, and as such stands in need of such Apūrvas as would help in its accomplishment. It is only Verbs that are found to be expressive of what does not already exist at the time, but has got to be accomplished with the help of certain agencies. And in as much as the Apurva is also something yet to be accom- plished, it stands to reason that it should be related to the Verb. 
As to how the Apurva is related to the Verb, this may be thus explained: Every Verb in an Injunctive Sentence is found to be made up of a verbal root and the Injunctive Affix. This affix denotes what has been called the Vidhi' or 'Bhāvanā', which stands for the activity of the Agent towards bringing into ez- istence what has to come into existence. For instance, the Injunctive Affix in the Injunctive verb 'Yajeta' means that the 
264 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Agent should have recourse to an activity towards the bringing about of what is to be brought into existence, in the shape of the Sacrifice, which is denoted by the verbal root in the same word, 'Yajeta'. This is what has been called 'Arthi Bhavana'. [For details about this Bhavana, the reader is referred to what has gone before just before the section on Arthavada Texts.] 
In connection with this subject, the question has been raised as to whether Verbs are always injunctive of action-Primary or Subsidiary--or sometimes they serve other purposes also? The conclusion on this point is that in many cases, where the Verb cannot, under the peculiar circumstances, enjoin an Act, it has to be regarded as merely expressive of a certain act which it serves to recall as being the one at the performance of which the text in which the Verb occurs can serve a useful purpose by being recited. As this is found to be the case with Mantras mostly, the Bhasya has put forward the view that Mantras are never purely injunctive. (See above, Section on Mantras). 
(D) DIVISION OF ACTS INTO PRIMARY AND SUBSIDIARY. 
The general law having been established, that every act en- joined in the Veda brings about an Apūrva, the Sūtras (2. 1. 6—8) proceed to note certain exceptions; which leads to the division of Acts into Primary and Subsidiary. The chief basis of this dis- tinction has been thus explained:-Every Act is related to some material Substance; hence this Substance has been regarded as serving the visible purpose of accomplishing the Act. In certain cases, the act mentioned turns upon itself and imparts an aid to the material Substance; for instance, in the case of the act of Threshing, which serves to clean the corn;-while in some cases, the Act rests upon itself entirely, its sole purpose being its own fulfilment; for example, a Sacrificial Performance. In this latter case, there naturally arises a desire in the mind of the Agent to know what useful purpose would be served by the Act in question; and when no visible purpose is found to be served, we have to assume a transcendental Result in the shape of the Apurva. Where, on the other hand, the Act is found to serve a distinctly visible purpose-e.g., the threshing serving to clean the Corn, there can be no justification for assuming any transcendental Result; specially when the Injunction of the Act is fully justified 
CHAPTER XXII: WHAT ACTS CONSTITUTE DHARMA 
265 
by the visible end. From the above distinction it follows that- those acts that are not meant to be productive (or preparatory) of material Substances are 'Primary' Acts,-because the material Substance is a sub-ordinate factor.-(Sû. 7). The reason for these Acts being regarded as Primary is that, as they do not produce any material Substance, nor do they produce any peculiarity in the Substance already extant, they cannot but be regarded as bringing about transcendental Results. On the other hand-Those Acts that are meant to be productive or preparatory of a Material Sub- stance are to be regarded as 'Subsidiary', because in regard to these, the Material Substance is the dominant factor.-(Sú. 8). To this latter class belong all such acts as the Consecration of the Sacrificial Fire, the Appointment of Priests to officiate at Sacri- fices, the threshing and grinding of Corns and so forth. 
It may be noted here that this distinction of Acts into 'Pra- dhana', Primary, and 'Guna', Subsidiary, is quite different from the subject of Anga or Shëṣa (Auxiliary) and Angin or Sheṣin, (Principal): as the former distinction is applicable to Acts alone, while the latter is a relationship between Acts on the one hand and Substances, Qualities and Purifications or Embellishments on the other. (See Sutra 3. 1. 1, et seq.) [See below, p. 272] 
From what has gone above it would seem that there is always an Apurva in connection with, and brought about by, the Act denoted by every verb. In order to remove this misconception, the Sūtras (2. 1. 6-8 and 9-12) have pointed out that it is not so, and that Actions have to be classed under two Heads-(1) Pradhana (Primary) and (2) Guna (Secondary or Subsidiary), and it is the Primary Act only that directly leads on to an Apurva, the Sub- sidiary Act only helps the Primary. Examples of this have been provided. There is the Vedic text 'One should thump the corn',' where the Act of thumping is laid down; and in regard to this act, the Established Conclusion is that no Apurva follows this act; it serves only the visible purpose of removing the chaff from the grains, and thereby renders them better fitted for being made into the 'Cake' to be offered; through this same visible Effect, it helps the Sacrifices at which the Cake is offered; so that there is no need for postulating a separate Apurva as resulting from the said Thumping. This act of Thumping therefore is 'Subsidiary' to that Act at which the Cake is offered-i.e., the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsṇ 
F.34 
266 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Sacrifice, which thus is the 'Primary' Act. Similarly with the Act of washing laid down in the Text 'One should wash the Sruk and other implements'; where the washing only serves to clean the Implements and render them fitter for use at the Acts where they are used; it does not lead to a separate Apurva of its own. 
What has been said regarding Verbs occuring in Vedic Texts being Injunctive of Acts might lead people to think that every verb that occurs in a Vedic Text enjoins an Act, and hence all Vedic texts are Injunctive. This idea is negatived by Sutra 2. 1. 30-31, where it is shown that every such verb is not Injunc- tive, there are many that are merely assertive or declaratory; these latter are those occurring in Mantra-te.rts which, as a rule, are not injunctive (See above under Mantra). 
This is followed in the Sutra by an account of 'Mantra'. (for which see above). 
(E) CLASSIFICATION OF ACTS. 
Before proceeding with the subject of Difference among Acts, it is necessary to explain the various divisions and classifications that have been made among Acts. The first division of Acts is into (1) Laukika, Worldly, Secular and (2) Vaidika, Super- physical, Religious, Spiritual. The Religious Acts are classed under three heads: -(1) Positive or Act proper, i.e., the Perform- ance of an Act, (2) Negative, i.e., the avoidance of an Act; and (3) Positive-Negative, partaking of the character of both Perform- ance and Avoidance. Another division of Religious Acts is into- (1) Gunakarma, Secondary or Subsidiary Act, (2) Pradhana or Artha-karma, Primary, Effective, Act. Of the Positive Act, there are three main divisions into the three kinds of Offering'- (1) Yaga, Sacrifice, offering to a Deity, (2) Homa-offering into Fire (or Water), and (3) Dāna, giving away, by waiving one's own proprietory right over the thing in favour of another person.-(See Mimämsābālaprakasha, pp. 81 et seq.). Katyayana, in his Shrauta-Sutra has drawn a further distinction between laga and Homa, by which the Yaga is the offering made by a man standing and pronouncing the syllable Vasat' at the end of the Mantra, while Homa is the offering made by the man sitting and pronounc- ing the syllable Svähä'. A further division has been made 
Svāhā'. among the Vedic or Religious Acts by Mīmāmsakas, into the fol- 
CHAPTER XXII: WHAT ACTS CONSTITUTE DHARMA 
267 
lowing three classes: -(1) Kratcartha, au act helping the fulfil- ment of the Sacrifice; under this head fall all Gunakarma, Sub- sidiary Acts; (2) Puruṣārtha, accomplishing things desired by the Agent; under this head fall all Artha-karma, Primary Acts, as directly bringing about the Apurra which leads to the desired Re- sult;-(3) Those that are neither Krateartha nor Puruşurtha; under this falls the Rite of Fire-installation. These three heads have been accepted by the Bhaṭṭa (See Shastradīpikā, 4. 1, 1, Dravyārjanādhikarana). Prabhākara however admits only the first two of these; nor do we find any authority for the third either in the Bhasya or in the Tantravārtika. The twofold classification is based upon the Sutra itself. I. 1. The first of these, the Krat- vartha Act, is of two kinds-(1) The Īrādupakāruka-helping the Sacrifice Indirectly, through distinct subsidiary Apūrras, e.g., the Prayājas helping the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa; (2) the Sannipattyopa- kāraka, helping the Sacrrfice Directly, without any intervening subsidiary Apurvas. This Sanni pattyopakāraka itself is of three kinds (1) that which serves a visible purpose; (2) that which serves an imperceptible purpose and (3) that which serves both visible and imperceptible purposes. The first of these again is of two kinds (1) that which produces a visible effect in the Sub- stance going to be used at the Sacrifice, and (2) that which pro- duces a visible effect in the Substance that has been used at the Sacrifice, this latter being called 'Pratipattikarma', Act of Dis- posal. The second kind of the Sannipattyopakāraka again, is of three kinds (1) Affecting the Substance that has been used, e.y., the burning of the Substances out of which the offerings have been made; (2) affecting the Substance to be used, e.g., sprinkling water over the corn; and (3) affecting the Substance at the time that it is being used. Another division of the Krateartha Act is into- (1) Utpatti. Productive Act, e.g., kneading of the dough, which produces the Cake, (2) Prupti, Obtaining, securing,-e.g., milk- ing of the Cow, whereby the milk is obtained; and (3) Vikṛti, Modificatory,-e.g., threshing of the Corn, which alters its appear- ance; (4) Samskṛti, Purificatory, Embellishment,-e.g., sprinkling of water over the corn. There is yet another classification of the Vedic or Religious Act into the following four classes-(1) Pra- kṛti, Archetypal, e.g., Agnihotra; (2) Vikṛti, Ectypal, e.g., the Mäsägnihotra; (3) Prakṛti-Vikṛti,-partaking of the character of both, Archetypal and Ectypal; e.g., the Agnişomiya, which is the268 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Ectype of the Darsha-Purnamasa, but the Archetype of the Savaniya (See Mimamsă Sú. 8. 1. 14), and (4) Neither Arche- typal nor Ectypul; e.g. the Darvi-homa (See last Adhikarana of Adhyāya 8). 
The most important classification of the Religious Act is into -(1) Nitya, Compulsory, (2) Naimittika, Contingent (Occ .sional), (Sú. VI), and (3) Kāmya, Prospective, performed for a particular 
purpose. 
The above are the divisions of the Positive Act, the Negative Act consists in Cessation from Activity, or Non-performance. This is of two kinds (1) Kratvartha, e.g., the not-holding of the Sodashin- Vessels; and (2) Puruşārtha, e.g., the not-killing of animals. 
The third kind of Act, which is neither Positive nor Negative is also of two kinds-(1) Kratvartha, e.g., the reciting of the Yējajāmaha-Mantras which is done at the main Sacrifice and which is not done at the Auuyājus, and (2) Puruşārtha, e.g., the vow not to look at the Rising Sun. 
(F) GROUNDS OF DIFFERENTIATION AMONG ACTS. 
Having explained the more important classifications of Acts, we shall now turn our attention to the main question-'What are the Means by which we ascertain the difference or non-difference among Acts.' 
The Bhasya (on Su. 2.1.1) has cited six means of such differentiation:-(1) Different Words (Under Sū. 2. 2. 1), (2) Repe- tition (Under Su. 2.2.2), (3) Number (Under Su. 2. 2. 21), (4) Accessory Details (Under Sü. 2.2.23), (5) Context (Under Sū. 2.3.24) and (6) Name (Under Su. 2.2.22). 
We proceed to explain each of them:- 
(1) Differentiation by Different Words:-When there is a different word, there is a different Act, because of its special equip- ment says the Sutra (2.2.1). There are such texts as-(1) 'One should Sacrifice with Soma', (2) 'One should pour the Libation into Fire,' and (3) 'Give gold to Atreya'; where we have three sentences containing three different verbs, denoting Acts. Unless there be reasons to the contrary, these three Acts must be differ- ent; as each of them has its own equipment of accessories. 
CHAPTER XXII: WHAT ACTS CONSTITUTE DHARMA 
269 
(2) Differentiation by Repetition: In a case where the same verb is used, but several times,-the Repetition of one and the same word should indicate difference among the acts; because, if there were no difference, the repetition would be useless. (Sūtra 2.2.2). For example,-we have such texts as Samidho yajati- Tanvūnapātam yajati-Ido yajati-Varhiryajati-Svāhākāram yajati, -where the same verb 'yajati' has been repeated five times. On the face of it the idea is that the verb being the same, the Acts denoted by them must be the same. But the Established Conclu- sion is that if one and the same act were meant to be enjoined, then there would be no point in repeating the verb five times; hence the texts should be taken as laying down five different Sacrifices. 
a 
(3) Differentiation by Number:-Number should be differentiator among Acts,-because it is based upon separateness, says the Sutra (2. 2. 21); e.g., the text 'One sacrifices seventeen animals dedicated to Prajapati'-lays down seventeen distinct acts of Sacrifice. 
(4) Differentiation by Accessory Details-such as the Deity, the Material or other Accessories-When u word denoting a material is related to a word denoting a Deity other than the one gone before, it becomes a Differentiator of the Acts-says the Sūtra (2. 2. 23); e.g., the text, 'When curd is put into hot milk, the milk becomes turned into curdled solids, called Amikṣā, which is offered to the Vishvederas,—and the liquid, the skimmed milk, is offered to the Bājins'-is taken as laying down two distinct offerings. 
(5) Differentiation by Context-We have the injunction of the compulsory daily Agniholtra in the text "One should offer the Agnihotra'; and in a different section of the Veda we have another text enjoining the performance of the Agnihotra for a month'. In this case the conclusion is that when the Context is different, the purpose must be different (Sū. 2.3.24); so that the monthly Agnihotra laid down in the second text must be different from the daily Agnihotra laid down in the former text. 
(6) Differentiation by Name:-The Name also differentiates Acts, as it occurs in the originative Injunction, says the Sutra (2. 2.22); e.g., the text-Athaiga jyotiḥ-atha vishvajyotiḥ-Athaişa 
270 
PURVA-MIMÄMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
sarvajyotiḥ'-is taken as mentioning three different acts named respectively (1) Jyoti, (2) Vishrajyoti and (3) Sarvajyoti. 
It is interesting to note that though difference of Context differentiates acts, difference of the Veda-Shakha is not accepted as a ground for differentiation; for instance, the Agnihotra is found enjoined by a text occurring in the Kathaka Resension. The conclusion is that the act enjoined in all these texts is one and the same Agnihotra,-because there is no difference in connection, in purpose, in form, in injunction or in Name says the Sutra (2.4.9). 
A certain commentator, says Kumarila, has accepted only four grounds of differentiation-(1) Different Words, (2) Different Names, (3) Different Accessory Details, and (4) Different. Results. He has included 'Number' and 'Repetition' under 'Words', and 'Context' under 'Result'. This however is not acceptable-says Kumarila. (Tantravārtika, Trs., pp. 885-886.) 
CHAPTER XXIII 
'PRINCIPAL' AND 'AUXILIARY' 
Difference among Acts having been established, the 
the next question that arises is-Is every one of these Acts self-contained and independent by itself in bringing about the Apūrva? Or some of them are auxiliary or subsidiary and subordinate to, and subserving the purposes of, some others? And if the latter, then what Acts are subsidiary and subservient to what? Though this 'subserviency of Acts' is the main subject-matter of this Third Discourse, yet as we proceed we shall find that it is not only Acts that are so 'subservient' or 'auxiliary', but also Substances and their Properties. This fact has to be borne in mind, because, as a matter of fact, the whole of the rest of the Sutras (Discourses IV to XII) turn directly or indirectly, upon this relation of Prin- cipal' and 'Auxiliary'. This has been thus declared by Kumārila (Tantra-Va., Trs., p. 924) : — 
शेषस्यैवाधिकारोऽत्र युक्तो नान्यस्य कस्यचित् । 
शेषधीसिद्ध्यपेक्षत्वात् सर्वलक्षणवागधियाम् ॥ 
C 
That is, the question of Auxiliary character' has to be dealt with here, because the proper consideration of all other questions of Motive and the rest dealt with under Discourses IV to XII, is dependent upon this idea of 'auxiliary character'. 
The first question is-What is an 'Auxiliary'? 
The answer to this has been provided in Su. 3.1.2-The Auxi- liary is that which subserves the purposes of something else; that is, the Auxiliary is to be defined as 'that which helps an- rther'; that is, what exists entirely for helping others. (Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 337). This has been further explained as 'that which is indicated by Direct Assertion, etc., as helping some Action, towards the fulfilment of its Apurva;' this latter qualification being necessary for precluding mere verbal relationship. This helping, or subserving the purpose of, something else does not necessarily, in itself, imply that the Auxiliary must in some way help the Principal; but such helping is assumed on the basis of 
271 
272 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Presumption. For instance, in the case of Sprinkling water on the corn, the fact of its having been enjoined in connection with a Sacrifice leads to the Presumption that it must accord some help to this Sacrifice; similarly in the case of the Prayājas prescribed in connection with the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa Sacrifices, we find that these latter stand in need of help; and also that certain other Acts in the shape of the Prayājas need something to which they could accord some help; and this mutual need leads us to the Presump- tion that the Prayājas help, and subserve the purpose of, the Darsha-Purnamasa Sacrifices. 
In this connection there is a question that has created some confusion in the minds of the students of Mimamsă. In Su. 2.1. 7-8, we have a division of Acts into 'Primary' and Subsi- diary'; now the 'Subsidiary' Act will naturally be subservient to the 'Primary', that is it will help it; where then is there the use of raising the same question over again (under Discourse III)? 
Two answers have been provided to this question. (1) That the Sutras under Discourse II have taken note of Acts only, and those also, only such as are actually found to fulfil only visible ends; while the present Discourse III takes up not only all Acts serving visible and invisible ends, but also such details as Substances, Mantras and so forth. This answer has been rejected by Kumā- rila (Tantra-Vā., Trs., p. 670), on the ground that under the said explanation, the subject-matter of Discourse II would be only a part of what is dealt with under Discourse III. The explanation that he suggests is that-(2) the fact that the Acts dealt with under Discourse II-Threshing of the Corn, for instance,-are 'subser- vient' to others can be ascertained only from what the Sutras set forth under Discourse III;-what has been said under Discourse II therefore is only this-that these acts cannot be regarded as bringing about an Apurva by themselves, for the simple reason that they are found to fulfil purely visible purposes in connection with some other acts;-'and under the circumstances, if they were to produce their own Apurva,-there would be several Apurvas pro- duced by the Act'-adds the Rijuvimalā (MS., Vol. III, p. 11). (See p. 265) 
According to Prabhakara (Bṛhati, MS., p. 65 and Rijuvimală. MS., p. 1) the connection between the two Discourses (III and IV) is to be explained thus:-What has been explained under Diş- 
CHAPTER XXIII: PRINCIPAL AUXILIARY 
273 
course II is only the difference among Injunctive Texts: that is to say, it has been shown there how and where two such texts are to be treated as different, by reason of the difference between the resultant Apurvas indicated in each, and also of the difference among the several adjuncts of these; and as the Act is the most important of these Adjuncts, the difference among Acts also has been expounded in this Discourse II; but this last only as the basis of differentiation among the Teats; thus the difference dealt with under that Discourse is that based upon consideration of connec- tion among the words of the Injunctive Text. On the other hand, the difference upon which the subject-matter of Discourse III is based is that of the Niyoga or Apurva resulting from Acts. (See Ṛijuvimalā, MS., Vol. III, p. 3). The distinction herein drawn becomes clear from the example of the text 'Washes the Cup', where the relation between the Cup and the Washing, as expressed by the words, is only that of the Cup being the objective of the Act of Washing; while the relation of 'Subserviency' between the two is based upon the fact that the Washing helps the Cup towards the fulfilment of some other result. Thus what is dealt with under Discourse III is closely connected with what has gone before under Discourse II. 
The next question is-What is it that can be 'Auxiliary' or 'Subsidiary'? 
The answer to this has been provided by Sútra 3.1. 3-6; wherein it is stated that the 'Auxiliary character' can belong to (a) Substances, (b) Properties, and (c) Embellishments, (Su. 3), also to (d) Acts (Sū. 4), (e) Results (Su. 5) and (f) the Human Agent (Su. 6).-(a) The Substance helps the Acts; no Act can be performed without a Substance;-(b) the Property serves the pur- pose of marking out the Substance to be used; and thereby helps. the Act; (c) the Embellishment is that on the accomplishment of which a certain Substance becomes fit for a certain purpose, and thus helps the Act; (d) the Act also is enjoined, not as something to be accamplished in itself, but only as a means of accomplishing the desired Result; and in this capacity the Act is 'auxiliary' to the Result; (e) the Result of the Act also accrues to the performing Agent, and thereby serves to help and benefit him; thus the Result also is 'Auxiliary' to the Agent;-(f) the performing Agent also figures as 'Auxiliary' to the Act, in cases where, for instance, 
F. 35 
274 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
the Sacrificial Post is declared to be 'as tall as the Sacrificer'. (Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 339-340.) 
There has been a difference of opinion among ancient sages on this matter of what can be an Auxiliary': According to sage Badari, the 'Auxiliary' character can belong to Substances, Properties and Embellishments only (as stated in Su. 3); while according to Jaimi- ni, it can belong to the Act, the Result and the Agent also. These two views have been sought to be reconciled by the revered Vṛtti- kāra in the following manner:-In relation to the Sacrificial Act, it is only Substances, Properties and Embellishments whose Auxi- liary character' is absolute, these are always auriliary; while the 'Auxiliary character' of the other 
the other three-Act, Result and the Performing Agent-is relative; for instance, while the Act is 'Principal' in relation to the Substance, it is 'Auxiliary' to the Result; the Result is 'Principal' in relation to the Act, but 'Auxiliary' to the Agent: and the Agent is 'Principal' in relation to the Result, but 'Auxiliary' to the Act,-(Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 340) 
The 'auxiliary character' of the Agent in relation to the Act (of Sacrifice, as enjoined by the word 'Yajeta') is clearly indicated by the Injunctive word 'Yajeta itself, in the connotation whereof the Act of Sacrifice forms the 'Principal' factor; and the Agent comes in only because without him, the said Act would not be possible. 
The conclusion thus is that while 
while Substances, Properties and Embellishments are always 'Subsidiary',-the Act, the Result and the Agent are both Auxiliary' and 'Principal' in relation to one another. 
--Says Kumarila (Tantravārtika, Trs., p. 944). 
फलयागनराणां च द्यकारत्वं परस्परम् । 
(A) CLASSIFICATION OF AUXILIARIES. 
Auxiliaries have been classified by Kumarila and his follow- ers under two heads-(1) Direct and (2) Indirect. Those Auxi- liaries which help in the fulfilment of the Sacrifice, and only through that Sacrifice, the Final Apurva,, are called 'Direct'; for instance, (a) the Substance (Corn) and (b) its Embellishments (Washing and Water-sprinkling), (c) the Deity (Agni, etc.) and 
CHAPTER XXIII: PRINCIPAL AUXILIARY 
275 
(d) Mantras;—the water-sprinkling produces in the Corn a certain. Embellishment not otherwise possible: the threshing helps the Corn by removing the chaff from the grain; the Corn itself helps the Sacrifice by making up the Cake; the Mantras help the Sacri- fice by recalling and consecrating the Deity; the Deity helps the Sacrifice by becoming the Recepient, without whom no act of Sacrifice is possible; as the act of Sacrifice consists in offering Sub- stances to a Deity. All these are 'Direct' Auxiliaries. On the other hand, those Auxiliaries are called 'Indirect' which produce distinct purvas of their own,-these Apurvas being produced in the Performer's Soul-and through these subsidiary Apurvas, help the Final Apūrva of the Sacrifice itself. (Shastradīpikā, p. 202). 
Prabhakara and his followers (Prakarana pañchikā, pp. 202- 205) have proceeded on somewhat different lines, in regard to the classification of Auxiliaries. Their classification appears to be more logical and exhaustive. It has been made under the follow- ing four heads-(1) Jāti, Universal, (2) Guya, Quality, (3) Dravya, Substance, and (4) Bhavarthātmaka, Action. The last of these, Action, has been divided into (1) Sannipattyopakaraka, Directly helpful and (2) Ārādupakāraka, Indirectly helpful. That which produces its direct effects in a certain entity which is conducive to the fulfilment of the Sacrifice is the Sannipattyopakāraka, Direct 'Auxiliary', of the Sacrifice (Prakaraṇapañchikā, p. 202); e.g., the Sitting of the Sacrificer, the thumping of the Corn and so forth, bring about no Apürra of their own; but are related to the Final Apurva of the Sacrifice to which they are Auxiliary. The Sannipattyopakāraka, or Direct Subsidiary, is again divided into the following four kinds-(a) that which brings about a certain Substance, e.g., the kneading of the Flour, which brings into existence the Dough, which did not exist before; (b) that which leads to the acquiring of a certain Substance that existed already; e.g., the milking of the Cow; which brings about the acquisition of the Milk which was already there in the Cow;-(c) that which produces some modification in a Substance; e.g., the melting of Clarrified Butter, which changes the semi-solid into the liquid form; and (d) that which purifies, sanctifies or embellishes a Sub- stance; e.g., the Sprinkling of Water over the Corn, which does not produce any material change in the Corn, but adds to it some- thing invisible and transcendental. (Prakarayapañchikā, pp. 202 -205.) 
276 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Under the Bhaṭṭa view, the Sannipattyopakāraka or Direct Auxiliaries lead to no distinct Apurvas of their own; their full effect lies only in the accomplishment of certain material Sub- stances; these have thus only visible Effects (See Tantra-vă. Trs. p. 526), and help the final Apurca of the Sacrifice only through the aid that they impart to the material fulfilment of the Sacrifice. But even though these Auxiliaries themselves do not bring about distinct Apurvas, yet, according to the followers of Kumarila, a certain distinct Apurva does proceed from the choice of the parti- cular Subsidiary; says the Shästradīpikā (P. 203)— 
नियमादृष्टं तु कल्पनीयम् । तद्वरमेकमेव दृष्टाथोवघातनियमात् श्रदृष्टं कल्पितम् ॥ 
For instance, the visible effect, in the shape of the removal of chaff, for which the Thumbing and Threshing of the Corn have been laid down, can be accomplished by several methods; and hence, though the Thumping and Threshing may not produce an Apurva, yet the choice that the Performer exercises, in having recourse to the one method of Thumping and Threshing, for re- moving the Chaff, does produce an Apurva. The reason for this is that, according to Kumārila, every Vedic Injunction, by its very nature, must be related to an Apurva; and as the Thumping and Threshing have been enjoined, it must be related to an Apūrva; but as the Act of Thumping and Threshing itself is found to be productive of a visible Result, in the shape of the removal of the Chaff, the Apurva to which it is related can be due only to the choice of that particular method of removing the Chaff in prefer- rence to other methods; and the real reason underlying all this lies in the fact that the Vedic Injunction must lay down a Dharma, -and if that Dharma were not conducive to an Apurva, the said Injunction would lose its character of 'being an Injunction of Dharma'; and hence as the act itself is found to be conducive to only a visible end, we must accept an Apurva as proceeding from the choice that is exercised. It is for this reason that such In- junctions have been called 'Niyamavidhi', 'Restrictive Injunction'. 
This above view has not been accepted by the Prabhakara, according to whom, as explained above, though the Sannipattyo- pakāraka, Direct Auxiliary, is related to the Final Apurva of the Sacrifice, it does not produce any distinct Apurva of its own; as all that the Auxiliary-the Thumping of the Corn, for instance, does is to bring about something visible, e.g., the Re- 
CHAPTER XXIII: PRINCIPAL AUXILIARY 
277 
moval of the Chaff; and yet it is a fit object of Injunction, as it does, through the fulfilment of the Sacrificial performance, help in the bringing about of the Final Apurva of that Sacrifice. That is why such Auxiliary Acts have been called Sannipattyo- pakāraka,-which term has been etymologically explained as- 
यागस्वरूपे एव सन्निपत्य तस्यापूर्वसिद्धौ उपकुर्वन्ति 
(Prakaranapañchikā). This relationship to the Final Apurea is deduced from the proximity of the text enjoining the Auxiliary to the text enjoining the Principal Sacrifice as leading to that Final Apurea, and from the words of the text itself. This ex- planation has been objected to on the ground that, in this manner, as the principal fact of the Subsidiary being related to the Apurva would not be expressed by the Vedic text itself, this text would become practically meaningless. The Prabhakara's answer to this objection is that it is not necessary that every Vedic text must mention some purpose to be served; it is only a question of facts; a text that does not mention a purpose cannot be made to mention it. In the case in question however, the text does not become meaningless or purposeless, as it serves the purpose of lay- ing down a certain method of doing a certain Act; and it is only the connection of that method with the Apurra that is left to be implied by the said proximity of the text to the text enjoining the Principal Sacrifice;-and that Proximity forms one of the bases of Syntactical Connection is admitted by all philosophers. Thus the conclusion arrived at by the Prābhākara is-(a) that all Sanni- pattyopakaraka, Direct Auxiliaries, are 'Subservient' to the Apūrva, through Direct Assertion, (b) that they are 'Subservient' to the Substance conducive to the fulfilment of the Sacrificial Per- formance, through the very nature of the Substance concerned,- and (c) they are 'Subservient' to the Sacrifice itself, which is 'instrumental' in the bringing about of the Final Apurva, by vir- tue of their providing the Substance suitable for being offered at the Sacrifice. (Prakaraṇapañchikā, pp. 202-209.) 
As regards the second kind of Auxiliary, the Arudupakaraka, Indirect Auxiliary, it is of two kinds-(a) That which ful- fils only an unseen purpose, and (b) That which fulfils a Seen as well as an Unseen purpose. As an example of the latter kind we have the Payovrata-he Penance of Living on Milk alone,-ob- served by the Sacrificer and his wife, during the performance of278 
PÜRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
the Jyotistoma; and as examples of the former kind, we have all the Acts that are enjoined by the texts like 'Perform the Samiṭ-- Sacrifice', which do not mention any effects produced by the Act either in any Substance or in the performing Agent, which would help the main Act of Sacrifice; and as it is only effects produced in the Substance or in the Agent that could be seen, the act of Sacrifice cannot but be regarded as bringing about an Unseen result. But all Acts of this class produce an intermediate Apurva, through which they help in the appearance of the Final Apurva of the Principal Sacrifice, to which latter, on that ac- count, they are regarded as 'Auxiliary'. As these Actions do not help the Principal Sacrifice in any perceptible manner, if they were not held to be productive of the intermediate Apurva, then, as they will have disappeared long before the fruition of the Final Apurva, they would not accord any help to the Principal Sacrifice. It is for this reason that in such cases, Prabhakara also admits of intermediate Apurcas resulting from the Auxiliaries. 
This admission of the intermediate Apurvas might give rise to the idea that a result of this kind would raise the further ques- tion regarding the method by which those Intermediate Apūrvas are to be brought about. With a view to such a contingency, the Prabhakara (in Prakaraṇapanchika, pp. 214-215) has drawn a subtle distinction between the 'Anusṭheya' and the 'Karya'; that which is recognised by the Agent, independently by itself, as something to be done by me' is Anustheya; while that is Kārya which, not existent before, is brought into existence only for the sake of the accomplishment of the former. It is the Final Apurva alone that is Anastheya; and as a rule, the questions of method and procedure arise only in regard to what is Anustheya, not in regard to what is Karga; hence no such question can arise in re- gard to the Intermediate Apurvas, which are recognised only as helping in the accomplishment of the Final Apūrva. 
It may be noted here that the Prabhakara is rather strict in the matter of postulating Apurvas; so long as he can find any perceptible result to justify an act, he will not assume an Adṛṣṭa or Apūrva; Kumarila, on the other hand, postulates an Apurra in connection with every Injunction. Being an Invitābhidhānavādin, the Prabhakara does not accept the mašim, Shābdī ākānkṣā shabdenaira purgate',-by which the Details of Method and Pro- 
CHAPTER XXIII: PRINCIPAL AUXILIARY 
279 
cedure can be sought after only for the sake of a result in the shape of the Jpūrva, and not for the sake of the Substance.( See Nyāyamālāvistara, p. 423). This maxim necessitates the assump- tion of an Apurea with every Injunction, each of which under this maxim, must be self-contained, having all its needs as an Injunction supplied by itself; hence even that Apurva, which is one of the factors in the Bhāranā denoted by the Injunctive verb, has to be got out of every Injunction, even of the Sannipattyo- pakaraka or Direct Auxiliary; such purra arising, if not from the Auxiliary act itself, at least from the Niyama or Choice of the particular method (See above). The Prābhākara however, not accepting the said maxim, takes every Injunction all along with all that it is found to be related to; and thus when the Auxiliary Act mentioned in the Injunctive text is found to be expressive of the bringing about of a material Substance, it becomes related to the Injunction of the Principal Sacrifice in the following manner: The Apurra of the Principal Sacrifice enjoined by the Principal Injunctive text is to be brought about by means of the Principal Act performed with materials and Substances brought into existence by means of the Auxiliary Acts enjoined by the Auxiliary Injunctive texts. Thus there is no need for assuming an Apurra in connection with these latter acts; the objective of these injunctions resting entirely in the materials and substances brought into existence in accordance with them, which materials and substances are used at the principal Sacrifice. 
(B) MEANS OF ASCERTAINING WHAT IS AUXILIARY TO WILAT 
There are six means of ascertaining what is auxiliary to what. These are (1) Shruti-Direct Assertion (in the Veda); (2) Linga-Indirect Indication; (3) Takya-Syntactical Connec- tion; (4) Prakaraṇa-Context; (5) Krama (or Sthana), Order of Sequence, (or Place); and (6) Samakhya-Name. 
- 
As an instance of (1) Direct Assertion, we have the following; -There are certain Mantra-terts which are held to be sacred to certain Deities; one such Mantra is named 'Aindri'; in regard to this there is the Direct Assertion, in Vajasanēya-Samhitā (12—66), to the effect that 'With the Aindri one should worship the Garha- patya Fire';—in regard to this Aindrī-Mantra, there is a doubt, 
280 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
as to whether it should be used in the worshipping of Indra,-as indicated by its name 'Aindri-or in that of the Garhapatya Fire, -as declared in the Direct Assertion of the Veda; the conclusion is that it should be used in the worshipping of the Garhapatya Fire; and thus the Mantra becomes 'auxiliary' to the act of wor- shipping the said Fire. (Mima-Su. 3.2.3-4). 
(2) Linga-Indirect Indication. It has been laid down in the Veda that at the Soma-Sacrifice, the Soma-juice that is left after all the offerings have been made should not be thrown away, it should be drunk. In connection with the drinking of the Soma-Juice, we meet with the Mantra-tert-Bhaksehi etc. (Tai. Sam. 3.2.5.1) called the 'Bhakṣanurāka'. In regard to this the question arising as to whether this Mantra is to be used in connection with the act of actual drinking itself-as indicated by the name 'Bhakṣānuvāka’ 
or in connection with the several acts attendant upon that act; the conclusion is that it is to be used in connection with the drink- ing and also at all the attendant acts, such as holding the Juice in the hand, examining it, swallowing it,-all which collectively go to make up the act of Drinking'. In accordance with this con- clusion, the whole of the said Bhakṣānuvāka Mantra-text is broken up into four parts,-each part being employed with each of the four acts mentioned above as making up the act of 'Drinking'. All this is due to the Indirect Indication of the words and expres- sions contained in the said Mantra-text. (a) So that the sentence beginning with the word bhakṣēhi' and ending with the word 'saghyasam' is to be used in connection with the holding of the juice- cup, such being the Indirect Indication of the word 'saghyasam'; (b) the Sentence beginning with the word 'Nṛchakṣasam' and end- ing with the word 'Avakhyēsam' is to be used in connection with the act of Looking at or Examining the juice, through the indica- tion of some of the words; (c) the Sentence beginning with the word 'Hinva' and ending with the word 'Atigaḥ', is to be used in connec- tion with the act of digesting (swallowing) the juice, through the implication of the words in the Mantra; and (d) the sentence begin- ning with the word 'Mandrabhibhūti' and ending with the word 'bhakṣayami', is to be used with the act of actual Eating or Drink- ing, as indicated by last word.—(Mi. Su.) 
(3) Vakya, Syntactical Connection.-Inconnection with the Jyotistoma, we meet with the declaration (Shatapatha Brahmana 
CHAPTER XXIII: PRINCIPAL AUXILIARY 
281 
and 
4.4.6.16 and 4.6.17.18) that "The Rk should be recited loudly, the Yajus, silently'. The question arises as to the exact meaning of the terms Rk and Yajus in this connection. Do they mean the Rgveda and the Yajurveda?-or the Metrical and Prose passages respectively? In the latter case, those Mantras which are in the metrical form, even though they may be contained in the Yajur- veda, would have to be recited loudly; while, in the former case, all that appears in the Yajurveda would have to be recited silently. The conclusion on this point is that the two words stand for the two Vedas, not for the metrical and prose passages; and thus on the ground that, in the earlier part of the passage, at the end of which was found the text in question, we have this declaration- "These l'edas came into existence, the Rgreda from Agni, the Yajurveda from layu etc. etc.'; and as the aforesaid direction in regard to the Rk being recited loudly is a continuation of this same sentence asserting the origin of the Vedas,-there is Syntac- tical connection between the two parts of the passage, by virtue of which connection it is clear that the terms 'r' and 'yajus' in the latter part of the passage refer to the l'edas spoken of in the former part; and in accordance with this conclusion the metrical passages occurring in the text of the Yajurveda should not be recited loudly. (Mi. Su. 3.3.1). 
(4) 'Prakaraṇa', Context.-There are the Vedic texts-‘(a) Desiring Heaven, one should perform the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa Sacri- fices', (b) 'He should perform the Samid-Sacrifice',-(c) 'He should perform the Tanānavapāt Sacrifice' (Shatapatha Brs. 1.5.3.9); we find that there is no Syntactical Connection among these three sentences, and each sentence stands independently by itself, and is, as such, capable of being regarded as the Injunction of a distinct Sacrifice;-nor is there anything in the Sentences to . deduce an Indirect Indication of any sort of dependence or connec- tion between the Samid and Tanūnapāt Sacrifices-enjoined by the second and third sentences respectively on the one hand, and the Darsha-Pūrṇamása Sacrifice—enjoined by the first sentence, on the other. It is found however that no result has been mentioned in connection with either the Samid or the Tanunapit Sacrifice, in the way that 'Heaven' is mentioned in connection with the Darsha- Pūrṇamāsa. We also recognise the fact that, being enjoined by the Veda, those two sacrifices also must lead to some desirable result; and yet at the same time, no such result is found to be 
F. 36 
- 
282 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
mentioned. All this leads to the conclusion that the Injunction of these Sacrifices is wanting in that factor of the Result, as without the Result to be accomplished, the operation of the Injunction remains incomplete (See above). Then again, as regards the Darsha-Purnamasa Sacrifice also, it is found that all the informa- tion that the injunction (contained in the first sentence) provides is that if one desires to attain Heaven, he should perform the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa Sacrifice'; and it says nothing as to the proce dure or method to be adopted in the performance of those Sacrifices. This shows that this Injunction also is wanting in the factor of the Procedure; and without this, the operation of the Injunction re- mains incomplete. Now then, taking the two sets of Injunctions into consideration, we find that, if taken together, they supply each othr's need; the factors wanting in the one being supplied by the other; so that the attainment of Heaven' mentioned in the Injunction of the Darsha-Purnamasa, becomes recognised as the result towards the accomplishment of which the Samid and Tanu- napat Sacrifices also lend some help-and also that these two Sac- rifices make up the Procedure needed by the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa. This Supplying of Mutual Need is what has been called Prakarana (Context). The conclusion thus is that the Samid and Tanūnapāt Sacrifices-collectively known as Prayājas-are auxiliary the Darsha-Purṇamāsa-(Mī. Su. 3.3.2). 
to 
(5) Krama or Sthana-Order of Sequence, or Position.-Under the Darsha-Purnamasa Section there is the Mantra 
दब्धिरसि श्रन्धो भूयासम् श्रमुं दमेयम् । 
"Thou art the Missile, May I remain unhurt; may I strike so and so (the enemy)'-(Taitti. Sam. 1.6.2.4). There is no Direct Assertion in the Veda as to where this Mantra is to be used; nor is there anything in the Mantra that could show by Indirect In- dication where it is to be used; nor is any guidance available in the shape of Syntactical Connection or Context. We find however that three sacrifices-the Agneya, the Upūnshu, and the Agniṣomiya- have been mentioned in a definite order; and subsequently we find three Mantras mentioned in connection with these three sacrifices; and as the three sacrifices are mentioned in a definite order,-and the three Mantras also are mentioned in a definite order,-the natural conclusion is that the first of the Mantras s to be used at the first of the Sacrifices, the second at the second and the third at the 
CHAPTER XXIII; PRINCIPAL, AUXILIARY 
283 
third. The Mantra quoted above happens to be second of the three Mantras; hence it is taken as to be used at, and be auxiliary to, the Second of the Sacrifices,-viz., the Upamshuyāya, Sū. 3.3.12). 
(Mi. 
(6) Samakhyā, Name.-There are several Mantras mentioned as to be recited by the several Priests officiating at the Sacrificial Performance; in many cases, there are no definite Direct Injunctions as to which Mantra is to be recited by which Priest; nor, in many cases, is there anything to indirectly indicate this;- nor is any guidance provided by either Syntactical Connection or Context or Order of Sequence. The conclusion however that there might otherwise arise under the circumstances has been averted by the Names that have been applied to the Mantras--such as (a) 'Ilautra' indicating that the Mantras (mainly those of the Rgveda) so named are to be recited by the floty Priest,—(b) ‘Ãdhearyava', indicating that the Mantras (mainly those of the Yajurveda) 80 named are to be recited by the Adhwarya-Priest, (c) 'Judgātra”, indicating that the Mantras (mainly those of the Samaveda) so named are to be recited by the Udgütr-Priest. Thus the fact of the Hautra-Mantras being 'auxiliary' to the Holy-Priest and so forth is ascertained through the name of the 
the Mantra.- 
(Mi. Su. 3.3.13). 
CASES OF CONFLICT 
The six Means of determining the character of Auxiliaries have been described. Now arises the question-Which of these is to be regarded as most authoritative in a case where two or more of these are applicable, but in conflict with one another? 
The answer to this question has been provided by Sutra 3.3.14. Among 'Direct Assertion', 'Indicative Power', 'Syntactical Connec- tion', 'Context', 'Place', and 'Name',—that which follows is weaker than that which precedes; because it is more remote from the final Objective. That is to say, when there is conflict between what is directly asserted by a Vedic text and what is implied by the Indica- tive Power of a certain word, it is the former that is to be accepted and the latter to be rejected. The principle underlying this super- session of the one by phe other is that in all matters relating to Dharma, nothing can be accepted as authoritative except what is declared in the Veda; in the Case of Direct 
284 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Assertion, what should be done is directly declared in the Veda; in the case of Indicative Power, on the other hand, even when the indication is accepted, the course of action indicated is accepted as authorised only after, on the strength of the said indication, a Direct Assertion to the same effect is assumed. It is for this reason that whenever there is conflict between these two, the Direct Assertion, which is self-sufficient, accomplishes its purpose long before the Indicative Power can accomplish its own, through the assumed Direct Assertion. 
(1) As an instance of this conflict and supersession, we have the following :—There is the Vedic text ऐन्द्रया गार्हपत्यमुपतिष्ठते- With the Aindri-Mantra one worships the Garhapatya Fire' (Vă- jasa. Sam, 12.66); here we have Direct Assertion declaring the use of the Aindri-Mantra in the worshipping of the Garhapatya Fire; on the other hand in the said Mantra itself 
कदा 'च नस्तरीरसिनेन्द्र सश्चसि दाशुषे - 
(0 Indra, you never hurt any one, etc. etc.') (Ṛgvēda Sam. 8. 51. 7), we find the word 'Indra' which, by its Indicative Power, indicates the Mantra as to be used in the worshipping of 'Indra'. Thus there is conflict between the two-Direct As- sertion and Indicative Power; but before the latter can become effective, it is necessary to assume, on the strength of this Indi- cation, a Direct Assertion to the effect that the Aindri Mantra should be used in the worshipping of Indra'; but the way to this assumption is barred by the actual Direct Assertion to the contrary declaring that 'the Aindri-Mantra is to be used in the worshipping of the Garhapatya Fire. (Bṛhati MS., p. 78B). As a consequence, the Indicative Power loses all its force and becomes superseded by the Direct Assertion to the contrary, and the con- clusion is that the Aindri Mantra is used in worshipping the Garhapatya Fire. 
(2) Indicative Power in its turn is more authoritative than Syntactical Connection. There is conflict between these two in the following case:-In connection with the Darsha-Purṇamāsa Sacrifice, there is the Mantra- 
स्योनं ते सवनं कृणोमि घृतस्य धारया सुषेवं कल्पयामि, सीदामृते प्रतितिष्ठ वृहीणाम्मेध सुमनस्यमान:- 
CHAPTER XXIII: PRINCIPAL, AUXILIARY 
285 
['O Cake, I am preparing a nice seat for thee, and with clarified butter I am making it comfortable; O Essence of Corn, may thou, with a peaceful mind, take thy seat upon this' (Tai. Brā. 3. 7. 5. 2). Here the words as Syntactically Connected make a single sentence of the two parts of the Mantra; and this would imply that the whole Mantra is to be used in the preparing of the Kusha-Seat for the Cake;-but the words of the two parts of the Mantra distinctly indicate that the first part of it is to be used in the preparing of seat (Sadanam Kṛṇomi'), and the second part in the placing of the Cake upon the Kusha (tasminsīda'). What makes this latter indication by the Indicative Power of the words more authoritative than the former implication by Syntactical Connection is that in the case of the Syntactical Con- nection, it is necessary to assume firstly, the Indicative Power of the word 'Kryomi indicating the use of the Mantra in the pre- paring of the seat, and then secondly the Direct Assertion in support of the idea that the Whole Mantra is to be used in that act of preparing; whereas in the case Indicative Power, the only assumption necessary is that of the Direct Assertion to the effect that 'the first part of the Mantra is to be used in the preparing of the seat, and the second in placing the Cake upon it'; thus this is one step nearer to Direct Assertion thun Syntactical Connection. This is what is meant by the words of the Sutra-Because it is more remote from the final objective'. Prabhakara has added one more reason for Indicative Power being more authoritative than Syntactical Connection:-As to how a certain Yajus-Mantra is to be used depends upon the useful purpose served by it; what this purpose is can be learnt,-in the absence of Direct Assertion on the point,-only from the signification of the words composing the Mantra; thus then, the use indicated by the Indicative Power of the words is based directly upon what follows the very founda- tion of the usefulness of the Mantra; Syntactical Connection on the other hand, indicates the use of the Mantra only on the verbal basis of grammatical construction afforded by the words, irrespectively of any useful purpose served by it;-in this way Indicative Power is much nearer to the basis of usefulness than Syntactical Connec- tion. (Brhati Ms. pp. 79A-79B). 
(3) Syntactical Connection is more authoritative than Contert, In the Sūktavāku mntioned in connection with the Darsha-Pur- namasa, there is the text- 
286 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
- 
अग्नीषोमविदं हविराजुषेताम् - इन्द्राग्नी इदं हविराजुषेताम् । ! 
(Tai. Bră. 3. 5. 10. 3);-as this Mantra occurs in the Context of the Darsha-l'ürnamāsa, one sec- tion of which is performed on the Moonless Day and the other on the Full-Moon Day-it would follow that the word 'Agnisomau' should be omitted on the Fulimoon Day; but before this impli- cation of the Context is accepted as authoritative it would be neces- sary (1) to assume, on the strength of the Context, the Syntacti- cal Connection (which is not present) between the two sets of words 'havira-juṣtām' and 'indragni',-(2) to assume on the strength of this assumed Syntactical Connection, the indication of Indru etc., by the Indicative Power of the words of the first section of the Mantra, and (3) to assume, on the strength of the assumed Indicative Power, the Direct Assertion to the effect that the Mantru is to be used in making offerings to Indra-Agni. On the other hand, Syntactical Connection directly indicates that the words have to be retained in both cases, in as much as each is syntactically connected with the word that follows; and for the acceptance of this Procedure, as the Syntactical Connection is already present, it is necessary to assume only the Indicative Power indicating the Deities and the ultimate Direct Assertion. This being one step less remote from the ultimate Direct Assertion, Syntactical Con- nection has been regarded as more authoritative than Context. A further reason provided by Prabhākara (Bṛhati Ms. p. 79B) is that what is indicated by Syntactical Connection is based upon the meaning afforded by the natural construction and interpretation of the words of the Mantra,-while what is indicated by Context would, at best, be based upon some construction or interpretation forced upon the words in view of circumstances beyond the limits of the Mantra-text itself. 
(4) Context is more authoritative than Order of Sequence or Place. Under the Rājasuya Sacrifice there are several Primary Sacrifices, one of which is the Abhiṣéchaniya; close upon the Injunc tion of this Abhişechaniya, we find the Injunctions of certain minor acts like Gambling; the Place, i.e., the proximity— of these latter to the Abhiṣechuniya would indicate that the Gambling is 'auxiliary' to the Abhiṣechaniya: on the other hand, the fact that the Gambling is mentioned under the Context of the Rājasūya, would indicate it as being auxiliary' to the 
CHAPTER XXIII: 
PRINCIPAL AUXILIARY 
287 
Rājasūya itself. Under the circumstances, the Gambling has been regarded as 'auxiliary to the Rajasiya. The reason for this preference is the same as in the previous cases-Conteart being one step nearer to Direct Assertion than Place (Proximity). Ac- cording to Prabhakara (Bṛhati Ms. 79B-86), Content is operative only through the mutual need between a certain act and a certain Mantra: hence when the Context indicates that the Mantra is to be used at a certain act (Sacrifice), it is more direct in its operation than Order or Place; because the connection between the Act and the Mantra is indicated by Context--or Mutual Need,-directly through Syntactical Connection, which is established, through that mutual need, between the words of the Mantra and the word denot- ing the Act; while, for establishing such a connection, the Order or Place would stand in need of several more intervening factors; for instance, the (1) Order or Place will indicate the Mutual need, (2) the Mutual Need will indicate the Syntactical Connection, and (3) the Syntactical Connection will indicate the connection between the Mantra and the Act. 
(5) Order or Place is more authoritative than Name. There is the Mantra—T 
(Become purified for purposes of the Divine Act') (Tai. Sam. 1. 1. 3. 1);-this is found in the chapter known as Pauroḍashika' by name;-this fact would imply that the Mantra should be used for the purification of the Purodisha, the Cake. On the other hand, the Mantra is found in a Place in close proximity to the words speaking of the Sānnayya vessels; on the strength of this latter fact the Mantra is used in the cleaning of these latter vessels. The reason for this also lies in the fact that the Order or Place is one step nearer to Direct Assertion than Name; and also according to Prabhākara (Brhati Ms. p. 80) in the fact that while Order or Place is some- thing Vedic, Scriptural, the Name is more or less Laukika, worldly, Secular. 
It being impossible for every act at the Sacrificial performance to be done by the Sacrificing Householder himself alone, the need arose for the calling in of outside assistance; this gave rise to the question as to how far the results of the acts done by these other persons would accrue to the Sacrificer; and the conclusion arrived at is that if the Sacficer selects and appoints and pays for the services rendered by these other persons, he becomes the prime288 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
mover of all that is done by these persons; so that the results and benefits of these acts should all accrue to the Sacrificer himself; his assistants, being paid officiating priests, get only the Sacrificial Fee provided in connection with each act or office. As such se- curing of services on payment has been laid down in the Scriptures, there is nothing incongruous in it. As a result of this conclusion, the acts that are actually done by the Sacrificing Master of the House himself are only (1) the Sankalpa, the declaring of his re- solution to perform the Sacrifice, (2) the Taraya-the selecting and appointing of the Priests to officiate at the performance, and (3) the Paying of the Fees to them; and the rest of the detailed performance is done for him by these officiating Priests. (Sū. 3. 7. 18-20). 
This is the Principle that may be taken as underlying the law that the instigator of the act is as responsible as the actual doer of it. 
This leads us on to the subject of these Officiating Priests styled Rtviks'. The first question that arises is- 
Is the number of such Priests limited? or may one engage as many as one likes?-The conclusion is that the number is limited; because they should be engaged in accordance with their titles, as it is under these titles that their respective duties have been severally assigned in the Veda,--says Su. 3.7.22. What is meant is that the number of Priests to be engaged should be as many as the duties that have been laid down as to be performed by the several performers named in the Veda. The texts naming such performers are the following:-First of all, the Adhvaryu (1) does the distribution, the Pratiprasthatṛ (2) offers the Manthin -the Nestr (3) brings up the Sacrificer's Wife,-the Unnetṛ (4) fills the cup;-the Prastotṛ (5) introduces the Chant,—the Udgātṛ (6) docs the chanting,the Pratihurtṛ (7) sings the Prati- hara chant, the Subrahmanya (8) recites the Subrahmanya,-the Пloty (9) recites the Prātaranuvāka hymn,—the Maitrāvaruņa (10) gives directions and recites the Puronurakya,—the Achchhāvāka (11) recites the Yajya,-the Grävastut (12) recites the Grāvas- totriya Mantra'. In accordance with this Vedic Text, there is need for just these twelve priests; hence these must be engaged. All the numerous acts have not been mentioned here. There are however several whose performer is indicated by the titles of the 
CHAPTER XXIII: PRINCIPAL AUXILIARY 
289 
priests; for instance, the act of Homa-Pouring Libations into Fire, is to be done by the priest who holds the title of 'Hot'. (Bhasya, Trs., pp. 632-633.) 
It might be argued that-"As one and the same person may perform several duties, the enumeration of the Duties cannot determine the exact number of Priests to be engaged" (Sū. 23). The answer to this is that this cannot be right; because in the originative Injunctions laying down the employment of Priests, it is found that each Priest, before he begins to function, is given a distinct title; for instance, we find such texts as 'He ap- points the Brahman Priest'. He appoints the otṛ-Priest', 'He appoints the Udgätṛ-Priest', 'He appoints the Adhvaryu-Priest' ; according to this each priest is given the title along with his ap- pointment, before he has begun to function. From this it is clear that in the performance of the Sacrifice, there is need for the Priests of this kind, hence they must be engaged; and in as much as the necessity of engaging the Priests is dictated by the requirements of the Sacrifice, the text quoted is to be taken merely as describing the appointment of the Priests, not as an Injunction of actually engaging them. [Kumārila has demurred to this and declared, in Tantra. Va. Trs. p. 1622, that the number is laid down by the Injunction of the appointments themselves'].-Nor is it necessary for the Veda to declare it in so many words that 'So many Priests should be appointed'. (Bhasya, Trs. pp. 633-634). 
The exact number of the Priests at the Soma-Sacrifice, as also at the Darsha-Purṇamāsa, (Says the Bhasya, Trs. p. 635) is seven- teen; these are the following, as definitely enunciated in the text prescribing their Initiation. (1) The Adhraryu, who does all that is prescribed in the Yajurveda-and under him come (2) the Prati-. pasthātṛ, (3) Nëstr, (4) Unnētṛ; (5) Brahman, who supervises the performance of the acts prescribed in all the l'edas, and under him come (6) Brāhmaṇāchchhamsin, (7) Agnit and (8) Potr:-(9) Ud- gātṛ-who does the chanting.-and under him come (10) Prastoty, (11) Pratihartṛ, (12) Subrahmanya;-(13) Hot, who does the invok- ing of blessings,-and under him come (14) Maiträvaruṇa, (15) Achchhāvāka and (16) Grävastut--(Su. 3.7.37, Bhāṣya Trs. pp. 646-647). The Master of the Sacrifice, i.e., the Sacrificer, has been regarded as the scenteenth 'Priest'-on the basis of the Simi- larity of Functions says the Sutra (3.7.38). This 'similarity of 
F. 37 
290 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
functions' has been thus explained-As a matter of fact, persons taking part in the performance of the Sacrifice are called 'Priests'; -the Sacrificer also takes part in this performance, and as such is entitled to be regarded as a 'Priest'. 
As regards the duties of these Priests, their functions are restricted by their names, that is, there should be a restriction and distribution of functions among the Priests on the basis of their names, as it is for that purpose that distinct titles have been as- signed to them. (Su. 40). That is, on the basis of the particular titles given to the particular Priests. there should be a restriction of their functions. The functions that have been named after a certain priest should be performed by that priest; for example, the functions named Adheargara' should be performed by the Adhvaryn Priest, those named 'Hautra', by the Hotr Priest, those named 'Audgatra' by the Udgātṛ-Priest. (Bhāṣya Trs, p. 650). 
That the duties of the Priests are regulated by the names (of the Acts and of the Priests) is the general rule; but there are excep- tions to this. For instance, in certain cases, there are distinct texts. enjoining the performance of a certain act by a particular priest. For instance, there is the text laying down that 'the Maitră- varuna-Priest gives directions and recites the Puronuvākyā' (Tai. Br. 3. 12. 9. 5), where the two functions of giving directions and reciting are specifically assigned to the Maitravaruṇa-Priest, though, under the general rule, the work of giving directions falls within the scope of the 'Adhvaryu's functions', and reciting is an act falling within the scope of the Holy's functions'; but in view of the direct Injunction quoted, the said functions are performed by the Maitrāvaruṇa-Priest. 
Similarly, certain acts have been given distinct names which take them out of the purview of the Priest to whom they would fall under the general rule, and assign them to other Priests. For instance, certain acts have been called Potriya' and 'Nestriya',— which acts would, under the General Rule, have been performed by the Brahman and the Adheargu respectively, but have become transferred by the said special names, to the purview of the Potr and Nestr Priests respectively.-(Bhāṣya, Trs. p. 651). 
There is an important counter-exception to this exception. The Shyena-Sacrifice is found mentioned in the section called 'Audgatra'; under the rule just stated, the whole of this Sacrifice 
CHAPTER XXIII: PRINCIPAL AUXILIARY 
291 
should have to be performed by the Udgáty-Priest alone. As a matter of fact however, the Shyena has the Jyotistoma for its Archetype; and the Injunctions relating to the Jyoțistoma distinct- ly indicate certain acts as to be performed by certain Priests; hence according to these, the same has to be done at the Shyena-Sacrifice also. (Sutra 3. 7. 50-51). 
There are several special functions assigned to definite persons; these have been dealt with in the Sü. 3. 8. The following are a few instances: (a) The Engaging of Services is to be done by the Master of the Sacrifice (3. 8. 1); (b) The 'Shaving of the Head' is to be done by the Master (3. 8. 3—8); (e) the observance of Fasting and the like are to be kept by the Master (3. 8. 3-8), (d) the wearing of the gold necklace, etc., appertain to all Priests (3. 8. 12). 
CHAPTER XXIV 
MOTIVE. 
'KRATVARTHA' AND 'PURUŞARTHA' ACTS. 
After the disposal of the question of the Principal' and 'Auxi- liary' character of Acts, there arises the question of what has been called Prayukti', motivating. This question is dealt with in the form What is it that provides the occasion for a certain act? What is it for whose accomplishment, the Act is to be performed, or a thing brought into use? This question follows upon the ques- tion of 
'Principal and Auxiliary', because as a rule, it is the 'Principal Act that motivates, incites, provides the occasion for, the Auxiliary'. There are some acts however for which the sole motive, or inciting cause, is afforded by the Desirable Result expected to follow from it; while there are others which do not accomplish anything desired by the Agent, and yet are performed for the purpose of helping in the fulfilment of some other act, which latter accomplishes something desired by the Agent. Hence the question of the 'Motive' of an Act necessarily turns upon the question as to whether the Act by itself fulfils something desired by the Agent, or something related to another Act. In the former case, the Act would be Puruṣārtha', ‘subserving the purposes of Man', and in the latter case it would be 'Kratvartha', 'subserving the purposes of an Act'. For this reason, before considering the main question of Motive, it becomes necessary to consider what is 'Puruşārtha' and what is 'Kratvartha'. 
The definition of Puruşartha' has been provided by Sutra 4. 1. 2, which says-'What subserves the purposes of Man' is that upon which follows the happiness of Man, as its undertaking is due to the Man's desire to obtain happiness and the 'Man's Purpose' is not different from Happiness. From this definition of the Puruşartha', it follows that 'What subserves the purposes of the Act is that which is of a kind other than the one just described- i.e., the undertaking whereof is due to Scptural injunction not to the Man's desire to obtain happiness, says the Bhāṣya (Trs. 
202 
CHAPTER XXIV: MOTIVE 
293 
p. 709). Thus then, the Puruşurtha is that which a man ordinarily undertakes entirely for the purpose of obtaining a reward in the shape of Happiness; and Kratvartha is that which helps in the accomplishment of the Puruşartha Act, and does not itself bring any reward to the Performer. 
There are some Acts again which are neither Puruşartha nor Kratvartha, such as Fire-installation and Vedic Study,-says the Tantraratna (p. 10). But even these are needed for, and hence helpful in the performance of, acts bringing about results desired by Man; as without Vedie Study and Fire-installation, there could be no performance of any Sacrifice at all. 
Under the category of Puruşartha' are included all the Prin- cipal Sacrifices, like the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa, as these lead to results desired by the Agent; while to the category of 'Kratvartha' are relegated all those Auxiliary acts that have their sole purpose in fulfilling the Principal Act itself; e.g., the Prayājas, etc., which are 'Auxiliary' to the Larsha-Pūrṇamāsa. All material subs- tances, along with their embellishments and sanctifications, are regarded as 'Krateartha', even in cases where the text mentions some special results as following from these; the mention of the results being regarded as only commendatory (Su. 4.3.1). There are certain things which have been regarded as both Puruşārtha and Kratvartha; for instance. the Curd is, in one case, mentioned only as a substance to be offered at a Sacrifice (when it is Krat- vartha), but in another case, it is mentioned as a substance to be offered for obtaining efficient sense-organs, (when it is Puruşurthu). (Sútra 4.3.5-7.) 
Against this definition of Puruşārtha as stated in the Su. 4.1.2, the Ṛijuvimalā (MS., Vol. II, p. 369) makes the following obser- vations: "The Puruşurtha should not be defined as that which brings about happiness; as this would not apply to the Nitya or Compulsory Duties, which do not bring about happiness.-[as a matter of fact the performance of compulsory Duties also brings about some sort of satisfaction, which is a form of Happiness].— Nor should it be defined as that to the performance of which only a person with some desire is entitled; as this would not include such acts as Vedic Study and the like. The Puruşartha should be defined as that which subserves the Principal Sacrifice and also the purposes of the Agent, by itself, and not through being em- 
294 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
ployed in another Act,-helping the Principal Act, only through this other Act; those of this latter kind being regarded as 'Kratvartha'. 
By a second interpretation, this same Sutra has been made to declare that the Act the Result whereof is desired for its own sake, and to which men are, by their very nature, attached,-do not, and need not, form the subject of an Injuction; as an Injunc- tion only urges one towards something towards which one would not direct his attention without such Injunction; while to the Desirable Result the attention is attracted by the mere fact of its being desirable in itself. This interpretation has been put forward by Kumārila as the second larṇaka or Corollary to the Sutra. (Tupṭikā.) 
The same Sutra has been taken by the Bhasya as bearing upon two other instances. For instance, in such cases as that of the text-The water should, as a rule, be fetched in cups, but in the milking vessel, for those who desire cattle',-the use of the Milk- ing Vessel is Puruşurtha because, while the mere act of water- fetching could be done in other vessels also the particular result,- obtaining of cattle-could be obtained only if the water were fetch- ed in the milking vessel. (See Bhasya, Trs., p. 710.) 
By yet another interpretation the Sutra is made to deal with the subject of the Acquiring of wealth and Prosperity. It is found that several methods of acquiring wealth have been laid down; for the Brāhmaṇa, Receiving Gifts, Teaching and Officiat- ing at Sacrifices,-for the Kṣattriya, Conquest and the like,—and for the Vaishya, Agriculture, Trade, Cattle-tending and so forth. In regard to this acquiring of wealth, the question arises-Is it Kratvartha-subserving the purpose of the Action of Sacrifice? or is it Puruṣārtha-subserving the purpose of the Man? 
The Prima Facie View on this question is that the Acquiring of Wealth should be taken as subserving the purpose of the Act of Sacrifice; because it is only in this case that there could be any point in the restrictions laid down in regard to the methods of Acquiring it. If it were meant only for the purpose of Man,— only for bringing about his happiness, then there need be no such restriction; on the other hand, when it is meant to subserve the purpose of the Scriptural Act of Sacrifice, then any deviation 
CHAPTER XXIV: MOTIVE 
295 
from the Scriptural restrictions renders the performance of that act defective. 
In answer to the above, the Established Conclusion is as follows:-The acquiring of wealth should be regarded as sub- serving the purpose of Man. It is a well-known fact that when- ever there is acquiring of wealth, it brings happiness to the man acquiring it; hence the undertaking of the Act of acquiring must be due to the man's desire for happiness (Sūtra 2), i.e., for the maintenance of his body in comfort and so forth; when a man's body is properly maintained it indicates that he possesses wealth;- the sacrificial Act has been prescribed only for the man with a capable body-and it is only in this sense that the Act of Sacri- fice can be said to have been laid down for one who has wealth; it is not necessary that the acquiring of the wealth should be in- cluded in the Vedic Injunction of the Sacrifice. From all this it follows that the acquiring of wealth subserves the purpose of the Man. Further, if the Acquiring of Wealth were held to be declar- ed by the Scriptures to subserve the purpose of the Sacrificial Act, the Wealth so acquired could not be rightly used for any other purpose; and this would put an end to all Sacrificial Acts (on ac- count of the Man's death, which would surely follow if he did not employ his wealth in the maintenance of his body-says Kumārila in Tuptika). Then again, if the acquiring of wealth were meant to subserve the purpose of the Sacrificial Act only, then every such act would have to start with the acquiring of wealth necessary for the performance of that act; (which is absurd). From all this it follows that the Acquiring of Wealth serves the purpose of the Man-as it is not different from Happiness (as the Sutra says). (Bhāṣya, Trs. pp. 712-713). 
The question of Kratrartha and Puruşartha bears directly on the question of Motive. What is Puruşartha, 'subserving the pur- pose of Man' contains its own motive within itself; while what is Kratvartha, 'subserving the purposes of the Sacrificial Act', would have its 'motive' in that particular Act towards whose ful- filment it would help, or of whose procedure it would form part. -For example, there is the text declaring that-'When curd is put into hot milk, there becomes formed the Amiksi, consisting of the curdled solid Bits, which is for the l'ishredecas; while the Vajina, the liquid portion the whey, is for the Vajins'. The question 
296 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
arising as to whether the Solid Pieces or the Liquid forms the motive of the act of Putting Curd into Hot Milk, the conclusion is that it is the former, the latter being only a bye-product. (See Brhati Ms. p. 93B. Su. 4.1.22-24). 
There are certain acts which have no motive behind them, which means that they do not serve any useful purpose at all, either in the way of bringing some reward to the performer, or of helping in the fulfilment of another act. One instance of Acts of this kind is the Throwing away of the Horn that has been held by the Sacrificer during the performance. Such acts have been called 'Pratipatti-karma', 'Acts of Disposal'. (Sūtra 4.2.19). To the same category belongs the act of Throwing away of the Stick which has been used in restraining the calf. (Sū. 4.2. 10 13). 
There are some other acts which do not either help any Sacri- fice or bring about any desired results. Such an act is the making of the Juhu with leaves of trees. This art has been regarded as Kratvartha, as the Juhu is used at the Sacrifice. (Sūtra 4.3.1). To the same category belong the Embellishments and Sanctifica- tory acts, which serve only to sanctify certain material things used at Sacrifices and render them fit for use; thus they render help to the acts of Sacrifice, as without the said embellishment and sancti- fication, the substance could not be fit for use. (Sūtra 4.2.11)— 
To the same category belongs also the Vishvajit Sacrifice, which has been enjoined, but neither as part of another sacrifice, nor as bringing about a desirable result by itself. The conclusion regarding such acts is that they should be regarded as Eringing about the universally desired result, in the shape of Heaven; and as such, being 'Puruṣārtha'. This principle has been called the Tisrajit-Nyāya', according to which, in cases where no particular result is mentoned, the Attainment of Heaven is assumed as the Result. But it is applicable to only those cases where no kind of Result is found to be either directly mentioned o indirectly indicated by supplementary texts; when any such result is found the act is accepted as bringing about that Result. (Bṛhati MS. p. 97)-(Sútra 4.3.10—16). 
An instance of the Result being indirectly indicated is found in the Ratrisattra Sacrifice, the injunction whereof is followed by a commendatory text speaking of Reputation for Respectability and hence this also is Puruṣārtha, (Su, 4.3.17-19) 
CHAPTER XXIV: MOTIVE 
297 
The Darsha-Purnamasa Sacrifices have been spoken of as ac- complishing all that is desirable; these are thus Puruşārtha. But one performance of these Sacrifices can bring about only a single result; so that for each particular result, this performance should have to be repeated. (Su. 4.3.25-28). 
As regards those actions that are distinctly spoken of as ac- complishing results pertaining to the physical world, the conclu- sion is that in every case, where there may be no obstacle in the way of the fulfilment of the result, the same result should be regarded as its 'motive'; but if in any case, there be some insuper- able obstacles in the fulfilment of the particular result, the Action should be regarded as bringing about super-physical results; thus in either case, the Acts retain their Puruṣārtha character. The fact of the matter is that results are to be regarded as pertaining to the 'other world' only in cases where it is found absolutely im- possible for them to be obtained and experienced in this world; e.g., the 'Pleasures of Heaven', which can be obtained in Heaven only. But as for results obtainable and experiencible in the world, -e.g. the obtaining of Cattle,-there is no ground for regarding them as pertaining to any world other than this physical one. (Sū. 4.3.27-28, as differently interpreted, Bhasya Trs. pp. 816-817) 
There are some acts prescribed, the result of which accrue, not to the actual Performer himself, but to his son and other rela- tions. For instance, the l'aishvānara Sacrifice, laid down as to be performed at the birth of a son; the result brought about by this Sacrifice, in the shape of welfare, accrues to the born Infant. These acts also are Puruşurtha. (Sūtra 4.3.38-39). 
F. 38CHAPTER XXV 
ORDER OF SEQUENCE 
So far, under Discourses I-IV Jaimini, has dealt with details of What should be done; in Discourse V he has dealt with the Order of Sequence in the performance or doing of what should be done. 
There are five means by which this Order of Sequence is deter- mined. They are-(1) Sruti' Direct Assertion; (2) Artha, Pur- pose (or Utility); (3) Patha', Verbal Text; (4) Pravṛtti', com- mencement (or Tendency); (5) ‘Kāṇḍa', Place (in the texts); and (6) 'Mukhya', the Principal. 
Before expounding these, one important difference of opinion on this subject has to be noted. The Bhatta and the Prabhakara hold entirely different opinions regarding the question as to whe- ther or not this Order of Sequence comes within the purview of Injunction proper. According to the Bhatta, Order does form an object of the Injunction (See Nyāyamālāvistara on 5.1.1.); while according to the Prabhakara it cannot do so. (Bṛhati, Ms. 100-100B; Ṛjuvimalā Ms. P. 497 et. seq. and Prakaraṇapañchikā P. 220). The reasoning of these latter may be thus summed up: In the case of all Injunctive texts, apart from the enjoined Act itself, we should be justified in admitting that alone as the further object of Injunction without which the enjoining of the Act itself would remain incomplete;-as a matter of fact, the Order of performance does not come under this category; because whether we perform the Act at one time or the other, it is performed all the same, and the purpose of the Injunction is fulfilled. Thus then, Order not being an integral factor in the Act, it cannot, as a rule, be an ob- ject of Injunction by the word that enjoins the act itself. In some cases however it is the Order itself that is enjoined by the Injunc- tive Text; for instance, the drinking or the eating of the Sacrifi- cial Remnant having been enjoined by one Injunctive text, there is another Injunctive text enjoining the Order in which that Drinking and Eating is to be done; this text being the one that lays down that 'the Priest who pronounces the syllable Vasat is to do the Eating, first of all'. Such instances however are rare; as 
11 
298 
CHAPTER XXV: ORDER OF SEQUENCE 
299 
a rule, the Injunctive Text says nothing as to the Order even when it does in certain cases, it does so not by means of the In- junctive Word, but by some other Word. 
Now as regards the Sir Means of determining Order.- 
(1) Direct Assertion, in the Veda itself; e.g., The Adhvaryu Priest should initiate the Brahman Priest, after having initiated the Master of the House'; where the Order of Sequence has been Directly Asserted, as this is the sole authority, says the Sutra 
5.1.1. 
This same Sutra has been interpreted as determining the pre- liminary general question-Is Order to be determined by the Veda, or by some other means? The conclusion is that it can be deter- mined only by the Vedic Injunction. (Bhāṣya, Trs. pp. 862-863). 
It has also been taken as determining the question as to whe- ther or not the Veda enjoins the Order; and the Established Con- clusion is that the Vedic Text does enjoin the Order. (Bhāṣya Trs. P. 863), though not necessarily by the same word that enjoins the act itself says the Prabhakara, 
(2) The Order of Sequence among Acts is determined also by Purpose, Utility; for instance, though the text enjoining the cook- ing of the Yavāgū—'Yavāgām pachati'—occurs in the Veda after the text enjoining its offering-‘Agnihotram juhoti', yet the cook- ing is done before the offering; through considerations of Utility or Expediency; as the cooking would serve no useful purpose after the offering has been made.-(Sū. 5. 1. 2). 
B 
(3) In some cases, the Order among Acts is determined by the order in which the Texts enjoining them occur in the Veda,-i.e., by the Verbal Text. E.g., in connection with the Darsha-Pür- namasa we have the texts-'One should offer the Samit,-one should offer the Tanunapat etc., etc.'; and the conclusion regard- ing these is that the Acts should be performed in this definite order of sequence (Su. 5. 1. 4),-this order being the one indicated by the order of the Vedic Verbal Texts concerned-says the Bhasya (Trs. P. 868). Hence the performance of the Samit should come before that of the Tanunapăt. 
(4) Order is also determined by Pravṛtti, Commencement. For instance, the Sacrifice of 'Seventeen' animals dedicated to Prajapati has been enjoined;-it has also been enjoined that each 
300 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
one of these seventeen animals has to go through a series of em- bellishments, such as Upäkaraṇa, Niyojana and the rest;-when these Embellishments come to be performed, the first of these may be done to any one of the seventeen animals one likes; but when this process has once commenced with a particular animal, and the first of the Embellishments has been done to that animal,- the second and subsequent embellishments also should commence with the same animal with which the first started; the order of these latter Embellishments being thus determined by the Com mencement of the Process. Says the Sutra (5. 1. 8)—In a case where it is possible for several details to be performed at one time, their order of sequence is to be determined by THE ORDER OF COMMENCEMENT, as the performance began in that order. 
(5) Order is also determined by Place. For example, we have the text-For one desiring offspring, one should sacrifice with the Atiratra-Stoma containing twenty-one verses;-for one desiring glory he should sacrifice with the Atiratra containing twenty-seven verses;-for one desiring social standing, he should sacrifice with the Atiratra containing thirty-three verses',-(Tai. Sam. 2. 2. 4. 7);-and in connection with this, it has been ex- plained later on-(under Sutra 10. 5. 26), that these varying num- bers of verses have to be made up by introducing additional verses. Now, the question that arises is-when this introducing of addi- tional verses is being done, are these additional verses to be intro- duced promiscuously, without any regard to the order of sequence? or, are they to be introduced in the order in which they occur in their respective Vedic texts? The Established Conclusion is that the order of the verses introduced into the Atiratra is determined by the Place that each verse occupies in the text of the Veda; so that those that appear first in the text of the Veda should be introduced first (Bhasya, Trs. P. 873). The Bhasya points out that the above case might well be taken as an instance of Order determined by Verbal Text (No. 3 above); hence it has provided another instance. The Jyotisṭoma is the Archetype of the Sadyaskra Sacrifice; at the Jyotistoma, three animals are sacrificed in the following order :- (1) the Agnişomiya animal is sacrificed on the Previous Day,- (2) the Savaniya animal is sacrificed on the Extraction Day, at the Morning Extraction, (3) the Anubandhya animal is sacrificed after the Final Sacrificial Bath. In accordance with the General Law regarding Archetypes and their Ectypes, the order of the 
- 
CHAPTER XXV: ORDER OF SEQUENCE 
301 
sacrificing of the three animals in connection with the Sadyaskra would be the same as the above, had it not been for the special Injunction that 'At the Sadyaskra, all the animals should be sacrificed together'; it has also been decided that at the Sadyaskra, this sacrificing of all the three animals has to be done on the Extraction Day. Now in regard to this, there arises the question, -when all the three animals are going to be sacrificed together on the same day, what is to be the order in which they are to be sacri- ficed? Should the Agniṣomiya be sacrificed first, in accordance with the order indicated by the Verbal Texts mentioning the three animals? or, should the Savaniya be sacrificed first,-on the strength of its Place, as being the first to be sacrificed on that parti- cular day (of Extraction)?—The Established Conclusion on this question is that the Savaniya is the first animal to be sacrificed, on the basis of Place', which is the first for the Saraniya for that day. (Bhasya Trs. Pp. 873-874). 
(6) Lastly, Order is also determined by the Principal; that is, the Order of Sequence at the Subsidiary should follow the order at the Principal because Accessories are meant to subserve the pur- poses of the Principal-says the Sutra (5.1.14). For example, in connection with the Chitra-Sacrifice two offerings have been en- joined, both called 'Sarasvata', on the ground of one being offered to Sarasvati, a female Deity, and the other to Sarasvan, a male Deity. In the actual offering of these, the question arises as to which one of the two should be offered first. The Established Conclusion is that the Order of Sequence should be deter- mined by the order at the Primary or Principal Sacrifice. In connection with the Principal Sacrifice, in the Yajyanuvākyā text, the offering to the female Deity is mentioned first; so that the same should be the 
at the Subsidiaries also. 
(Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 875.) 
case 
There are some cases where there is conflict among the above six Means of Determining the Order of Sequence among Acts. 
(1) Sutra 15 deals with a case where there is conflict between the order indicated by Verbal Texts (No. 3 above) and that indi- cated by the Principal (No. 6 above). Under the Darsha-Purna- māsa Sacrifice, there are two offerings, the Agniṣomiya and the Upāmshuyāja;—the substance offered at the Agnisomiya is the Cake, while that used at the Upamshuyāja is clarified Butter; as 
302 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
regards the Details, those of the Cake are laid down first, then follow those of the Clarified Butter; but as between the two Prin- cipals the Agnişomiya and the Upāmshuyāja, the Upamshuyāja is laid down first, then the Agnişomiya. Now, in regard to the performance of the Details at the Agniṣomiya, there arises the question-Which are the Details to be performed first? Those relating to Clarified Butter, on the strength of the order of the Principals, between which two, the first to be laid down is the Upāmshuyāja, which has the Clarified Butter for its material? or, those relating to the Cake, on the strength of the Order of the Verbal Texts, among which those speaking of the Cake come first? The Established Conclusion on this question is as follows:-The Order of Sequence, among Subsidiaries should be that indicated by the Verbal Texts, (Sü. 5.1.15); and the reason for this is that- the order indicated by the Verbal Terts is one that is indicated by the injunctions of the Subsidiaries themselves; so that if any other Order were adopted, the said Injunctions would be violated. Another reason for the superiority of the Order of the Verbal Texts is that, it has the support of the specific Injunction of 'Vedic Study,' which lays down the study of the Vedic Texts in the order in which they actually appear in the Veda; whereas in support of the Order of the Principals, there would be only the extremely subtle Syntactical Connection of the entire body of the texts lay- ing down the performance of the Sacrifice; [i.e., an order, not directly laid down, but only assumed by Inference-adds Kumā- rila]. (Bhasya, Trs., pp. 876-877). 
The following explanation has been supplied by Kumarila, in the Tupțika:-The Order of Verbal Texts' is one that is learnt from the 'Study of the Veda', wherein the texts are found in a definite order; the order therefore is directly perceptible. In the case of the Order of the Principals', on the other hand, there is, first of all, the practical principle of expediency that all the details should be performed together; thus concomitance of the details is indicated by the Injunction of the performance of the Sacrifice; and as a necessary corollary to this concomitance, the Order of Sequence also comes to be inferred. Now this inferred Order of Sequence is rightly rejected in favour of the Directly Perceived Order of Sequence in accordance with the Verbal Texts. 
Among cases of order determined by Verbal Texts, there are some cases where there is conflict between the order of Sequence 
CHAPTER XXV: ORDER OF SEQUENCE 
303 
indicated by the Mantra-text and that indicated by the Brahmaṇa- text. Where there is such conflict, the order of the Mantra-text should be followed, because the capacity to be used as it stands is inherent in the Mantra; hence it is that the Brāhmaṇa-text is taken as the originative Injunction of Acts, says the Sūtra (5.1.16). For instance, in connection with the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa it is found that the Mantra-texts bearing upon the Agneya-which forms part of the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa, come before,-while the Brahmaṇa- terts bearing upon it come after,-those bearing on the Agniṣomiya Sacrifice. That is, the Agniṣomāya is laid down by Brahmaṇa- terts occurring in the Fifth Prapaṭhaka of the Taittiriya Brāh- mana, and the Agneya is laid down by Brahmana-te.rts occurring in the Sixth Prapathaka; but in the Mantra-Kanda the Mantras connected with the Agneya are found before those connected with the Agnisomiya, The Established Conclusion on this point is as follows:-As a matter of fact, the Mantra has the capacity to be used as it stands in its own form; it is by nature of this capacity that the Mantra is actually used at Sacrifices; hence the Order in which the Mantra appears serves a percep- tibly useful purpose of being used in that order; as regards the Brāhmaṇa-text on the other hand, it serves the other purpose of enjoining the performance of Acts and in most cases, it is not meant to be used in its Verbal form as it stands.--(Bhasya, Trs., p. 878.) 
In the case of a number of Prospective Sacrifices,-i.e., those performed entirely for the purpose of obtaining a worldly reward, there is no restriction as to the Order in which they are performed, independently, each by itself. When each is performed by itself, it may be performed at every time that the performer has the desire for securing the particular reward. (Sutra, 5.3.32—36.) 
(1) Ist is the common name applied to all Sacrifices at which the offerings consist of Milk, Butter, Rice, Barley and other grains, and the 'Soma' is the common name applied to all Sacrifices where the offerings consist of Soma-Juice. As between the 'Iṣṭi' and the Soma' Sacrifices, there is no restriction regarding their relative order of sequence. (Su. 5.4.5-9). There is option as to which is to be performed first. (a) For one who is not going to perform the Soma-Sacrifice, and who installs the Fire without 
304 
PURVA-MIMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
reference to the Soma-Sacrifice, the Isti should come first; (b) but 
the 
if the Fire-installing has been done for the purpose of the Soma- Sacrifice, then the Soma-Sacrifice should come first-says Bhagya (Trs., p. 951.) 
CHAPTER XXVI 
'SACRIFICER' 
(A) QUALIFICATIONS OF THE PERFORMER OF SACRIFICES 
Sacrificial Acts and their Order of Sequence have been dealt with so far. The Sutras in Discourse VI consider the character and qualifications of the Performer. As a rule the Person 'en- titled' to perform a Sacrifice,i.e., who is going to perform the Sacrifice is one who wishes to obtain the result which that Sacrifice is expected to bring about. Hence the first question dealt with is the fruitfulness of the Sacrifices, that is, with the fact of the Sacrificial Acts really bringing about definite results. 
The consideration of this is prefaced by the consideration of another question: When the Vedic text enjoins a Sacrificial Act for the man desiring Heaven, this text asserts a certain relation- ship between the 'Desire for Heaven' and the Act of 'Sacrifice'. Now in this relationship, does the Sacrifice come in as the Means or as the End to be accomplished? That is, is Heaven the 'sub- ordinate' and Sacrifice the 'principal' factor? or vice versa? If what is enjoined in the text is the Sacrifice as to be accomplished by the Man desiring Heaven, then it follows that the Sacrifice can be duly accomplished only by the man who is imbued with the desire for Heaven; so that in relation to the Sacrifice, the 'Desire for Heaven' would appear to be enjoined as (a Means) for the Man. This would mean that it is only the man who has this 'desire for Heaven' who can be entitled to, and properly perform, the Sacri- fice. In this case, the Sacrifice would be the End and Desire for Heaven' the Means to that End. On the other hand, if what is enjoined for 'the man desiring Heaven' is the bringing about of the desired thing,-then this bringing about of the desired thing would have to be regarded as qualified. by the 'Sacrifice'; and in that case, the 'Sacrifice' would be recognised as the Means and the 'Desired thing' as the End. Thus the text may be construed in both these ways (a) 'the Sacrifice should be accomplished by means of the Desired thing-Heaven,' and (b) 'the Desired thing, Heaven should be brought about by means of the Sacrifice'. And yet both these constructions cannot be possible at the same time. Hence the justification of the question. The Established Con- 305 
F. 39 
306 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
clusion on the question is that the Sacrifice is the Subordinate, and Heaven, the Principal, factor (Bhasya Trs,, p. 969). The Text therefore is to be taken as the Injunction of the act of Sacrifice for the Man Desiring Heaven; and from this it follows that Heaven is the Principal Factor, and Sacrifice, the Subordinate factor; which means that the Injunction 'should sacrifice' should be taken as pertaining to the 'Man Desiring Heaven'; and it thus becomes established that the Text in question lays down the qualification of the Performer. (Bhasya, Trs., p. 971.) 
(B) WHAT IS 'HEAVEN'? 
+ 
In this same connection, the question has been raised regard- ing the exact nature of Heaven. Is it a Substance-or only a Quality, in the shape of Happiness? If it were a Substance, then it would naturally have to be regarded as the Principal Factor. 
The Established Conclusion on this point is that the term 'Heaven' stands only for a form of happiness, and it is only in its secondary figurative sense that it is applied to the thing or sub- stance that causes happiness.-As a matter of fact, people always describe 'Heaven' as happiness-says the Bhāṣya (trs., p. 967). 
The word 'Svarga', 'Heaven', says Prakaraṇapañchikā (pp. 102-103, is applied to that happiness which is totally free from all touch of pain, and which, as such, is desired by all men. 
It goes on (p. 149) to explain that Happiness or pleasure is not mere absence of Pain: In the absence of Pain, what we feel is that 'there is no pain';-the feeling being a negative one; and hence from the very nature of the cognition of Negation, it follows that what we are conscious of in this case is the Soul by itself, as without pain, and not as with a positive quality; on 
on the other hand, when we feel happy and feel pleasure, we are conscious of something positive, of a positive quality belonging to the Soul. 
The first qualification thus for the Performer is that he should have the desire for the Result. The next point is that the 'Person' should be a human being; as it is only a human being who can carry out the entire details of the prescribed Act-says the Sutra (6.1.5). Hence, it is Man alone who is entitled to perform Sacri- fices. Beings lower than the human are not so entitled, because they are not able to carry out the details of the Sacrifice in their 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
307 
entirety; hence for these beings, the Sacrifice cannot be a means of securing happiness. (Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 973.) 
The Bhasya (p. 973) goes on to add that Deities also are not entitled to the performance of Sacrifices, because apart from them- selves, there are no other Deities to whom they could offer Sacri- fices, and there can be no offering to one's own self; in fact, such an act would be no offering at all. 
- 
Nor are sages (Primeval) entitled to the performance of Sacrifices-says the Bhasya (p. 973); because they can have no Gotra; Bhryu and other sages cannot belong to these same 'Bhrgu' and other Gotras. Nor is the capacity to perform sacrifices per- ceptible in Deities and Sages. 
This view regarding Deities and Sages has been accepted by Kumārila (Sü. 6.1.4-5) (see Tupṭīkā, p. 87); but Parthasarathi Mishra has demurred to this (see Tantra-ratna), and has remarked as follows:-Time, with us Mīmānskas is beginningless; hence even before one set of sages Bhrg", etc., there have been other sets of the same sages in other cycles, and these latter would be the Gotra of the 'present' Sages; hence there is nothing to prevent Sages being entitled to the performance of Sacrifices. As regards Deities also, for those philosophers who, like us, hold that Deities. exist only in the form of words and they have a purely verbal existence, the reason put forward by the Bhasya has no force; because the Deity Indra also can make offerings through pronounc- ing the word 'Indra'. The reasoning of the Bhasya should there- fore be taken to refer to those philosophers according to whom Deities are real material entities. 
(C) DEITIES NOT ENTITLED TO PERFORM SACRIFICES 
It is interesting to note the grounds of expediency that have been put forward in the Bhasya (Trs. p. 975) against the view that Deities are entitled to the performance of Sacrifices:-"There is a certain Sacrifice which has been enjoined as to be performed for a thousand years; if Deities were entitled to perform Sacrifices, as they do have such long lives, this Sacrifice could be easily per- formed by them for a thousand years, and there would be no justification for taking the word years as standing for days, and thus bringing it within the capacity of human beings (who would naturally become excluded if the word 'years' stood for real years).308 
PURVA-MĪMÄMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
On the other hand, if human beings alone are entitled to perform Sacrifices, there is every justification for taking the word years in the sense of days. (See in this connection, Sutras 6.7. 31-41.) 
In the Brahmasutra 1.3.8-33, this question of the Title or Capacity of Deities to 'Brahmajñāna' has been discussed; we are told there (Su. 31) that they are not entitled to it, according to Jaimini, but according to Bādarāyaṇa (the author of the Brah- masutra), they are entitled. (Su. 33). Shankaracharya (under Su. 1.3.25) has also referred to Mi. Su. (6.1.1) in regard to this Adhikara or Title. Under Sü. 1.3.33, he declares that though it may be granted that Deities are not entitled to the various Upu- sanās, forms of Worship and Meditation, prescribed in the Vedas; yet there is no justification for denying their title to Brahma- juana, pure and simple. He also declares in favour of the view that Deities are embodied beings, and as such they also are entitled to that Supreme Knowledge of Brahman which leads to Mokṣa, Liberation. 
(D) ARE WOMEN ENTITLED TO PERFORM SACRIFICES? 
In connection with the question of Persons entitled to perform Sacrifices, there have been two wide exclusions; Women and Shūdras have come to be excluded from the performance on some- what vague grounds, specially as regards Women. 
Sutras 6.1.6-20 deal with the case of Women. 
The question has been raised in connection with the general Injunction 'Svargakāmo yajēta' ('Desiring Heaven, one should perform Sacrifices'). Is this Injunction meant for the Man alone or for Man as well as Woman? 
The Prima Facie View is that "As the word used in the text, 'Svargakāmaḥ' is in the masculine, the Injunction should be taken as restricted to the Male alone. This is the view that has been held by the Sage Aitishāyana, says the Sutra 6.1.6; a somewhat unusual form of stating the Purvapakşa. 
The Established Conclusion is that it is the whole Genus, the whole Human Community, Male as well as Female,-that is en- titled, under the Injunction, to perform Sacrifices; because there is no ground for distinction; hence the Woman also should be re- garded as entitled to perform Sacrifices, says Sutra 6.1.8. This view has been stated in the Sutra as sponsored by Badarayana. 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
309 
As the question of 'Equal Rights' is a moot question even to- day, we shall devote some attention to the arguments that have been adduced on both sides. 
The argument against Women's right to perform Sacrifices may be thus summed up :-(a) "To men alone should the title to perform sacrifices belong, as they alone possess property; as a matter of fact, Man alone possesses wealth, not woman; and wealth is necessary for sacrificial performances. Women cannot possess wealth, because they are bought and sold,-sold by their father, and bought by the husband. That is, having been sold by the Father, the Woman does not have any right over his pro- perty; and having been bought by the husband, she cannot have any right over his property. The 'buying' and 'selling' referred to here is in view of the Arga form of Marriage, where the Bride- groom has to give to the Bride's father a Cow and a Bull. There are several other Vedic texts which show that Women are actually bought and sold; there is the text, for instance, which says, 
If, upon being bought by the husband, the woman has dealings with others, etc., etc.'-(b) It might be argued that the Woman may acquire the required wealth on her own account by means of spinning, cooking and such arts. But what she earns will not be her own; it belongs to her husband ; - यत् ते समधिगच्छन्ति यस्य त तस्य aq says Manu.-(Sūtras 10-12.) 
* 
The answer to this argument is as follows:-The desire for results is equally present in the woman also. As regards her having no wealth of her own, this absence of property is based upon the authority of the Smrti (of Manu just quoted), while her title to the performance of Sacrifices would be based upon the Vedic text-if she fulfils the condition of having the 'Desire for Heaven'. From this we conclude that if the woman desires the results that have been mentioned as following from the Sacrifices, she should not mind what the Smrti has said regarding her not having pro- perty, she should proceed to acquire wealth and perform the Sacrifice. (Bhā. Sū. 13). As a matter of fact, however, the Woman is actually connected with property-says the Sutra (14); this is clear from the following words addressed to the Bride- groom at the time of marriage- धर्मे चार्थे च कामे च नातिचरितव्या 'In matters relating to Duty (religious acts), to property and to pleasure, she should not be ignored'. All that Manu's declara- 
a 
4 
310 
PÜRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
tion-that 'the woman has no property'-means is that 'the wife should not behave as if she were independent of her husband'.- (Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 981). As regards the 'Sale' that has been spoken of in regard to the wife, Marriage is a purely religious function, it is not a Sale in the ordinary sense of the term; an article is said to be 'sold' only when its price is a fluctuating factor,-some- times more sometimes less; in the case of the Marriage however, the so-called 'price' is a fixed item-'a hundred bullocks' for in- stance, for the girl, irrespective of her being ugly or handsome. Lastly, there is a Vedic text indicating that Women do have pro- perty; this text is पत्नी वा पारिणाय्यस्येष्टे "The Wife is mistress over the household property.' (Su. 16 and Bhasya.) 
We have seen that the Man and the Woman both possess pro- perty and are therefore equally entitled to perform Sacrifices. The next question that arises is-Is the Man alone or the Woman alone, entitled to perform Sacrifices? Or are both to perform them only jointly? 
This question has been dealt with by Sutras 6.1.17-21. 
The Prima Facie View is that each of them should perform the Sacrifice separately; because the Injunctive Word that lays down the Sacrifice—'Yajēta’—is in the singular number, and due significance must attach to this Number; whereby only one person should perform the Sacrifice at a time, and there should not be any joint performance by any two or more. 
The Established Conclusion however is as follows:-Though both, the Man and his wife, possess property, their action should always be joint, because of the declaration to that effect. (Sūtra 6.1.17). This 'declaration' is contained in such texts as (a) 'In matters relating to Duty, Property and Pleasure, she shall not be ignored'; (b) 'Religious acts should be performed jointly'. There are some Sacrifices again which must be performed by the Man and his wife together; such for instance, as the two important Sacrifices of Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa and Jyotiṣṭomu; at both these Sacrifices, oblations are laid down as to be offered out of the Clarified Butter that has been 'examined' by the Sacrificer and his Wife; and the performance of such Sacrifices would be defective if either the Man or his wife did not participate in it. Nor can the Man performing the Sacrifice associate any Woman he likes with himself; because the texts definitely assert that the Man should 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
311 
be associated with the woman who is his 'patni', and the 'Patni' is his married wife, in regard to which the Man has been exhorted 'to do jointly with his wife all those acts that need associating with a woman'. As regards the Singular Number in the Injune- tive Word 'yajéta', if stress were meant to be laid 
to be laid upon this Singular Number, how could the Sacrificer associate with himself as many as sixteen Priests? Further, the functions of the Wife at the performance are entirely different from those of the Sacri- ficer himself; so that by performing her own specified functions, the Wife does not disturb the singleness of the Husband. It is absolutely essential too that the Sacrifice should be performed by the Husband and the Wife together, because the wealth that is used at the performance of Sacrifices belongs in common to the Husband and Wife; hence the Sacrifice should be performed by both jointly; or if, either of them is unwilling, it should not be performed at all. There are certain acts in the way of personal Embellishments which may be done by the Man by himself, and no associating of the Wife is necessary there; to this category belong such acts as the shaving of the head, the wearing of the Gold ring and so forth. As regards the argument that the Wife being a purchased commodity, her ‘ownership' over property cannot be real,—this has been answered already; as a matter of fact, the idea that 'the Wife is a purchased commodity and is not entitled to own pro- perty' is based upon Smṛti, while the idea that She owns property is based on Vedic texts; and further, it is by virtue of her 'desiring the result expected to follow from the Sacrifice' that the Wife is entitled to its performance. From all this it follows that both the Man and his Wife are jointly entitled to the performance of Sacrifices. (Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 983-986). 
The next question that arises is-Is the Wife to do all that the Husband does? or are her functions restricted? 
The Prima Facie View is that as the Sacrifice is performed by both jointly, all the functions laid down as to be performed by the 'Sacrificer' should be performed by the Wife also; because she is as much a 'Sacrificer' as the Husband. 
The Established Conclusion is as follows:-To the Wife ap- pertain only such functions as are specifically laid down for her. She has to do also the 'Invoking of Blessings' and observe 'celibacy'. (Sūtra 6. 1. 24);-hd the reason for this is that the Vedic text 
312 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
distinctly lays down these acts as to be done by her, and in matters relating to Dharma, the Vedie text is our sole guide; and for the same reason she is to do also the Invoking of the Blessings' and also observe 'celibacy'. The reason given for all this distinction is that She is not equal (Sūtra 24); that is, She does not stand on the same footing as the Husband-says the Bhasya (Trs. P. 994). 
From what has gone before, this 'inequality' would appear to be in reference to the fact that there are some details that can be performed by the Man alone, and others again that can be per- formed by the Wife alone. The Sutra does not make any mention of the Woman being not entitled to study the Veda. The Com- mentators however, from the Bhasya downwards, have explained the inequality' of the Sutra to mean that 'the Husband is a Male and hence learned in the Veda, while the Wife is a Female, and hence not so learned' (Bhāṣya Trs. p. 993); and Kumārila goes a step further and offers a different interpretation of the words of the Sūtra; he says: "The term Ashiḥ literally stands for those Vedic Mantras in which blessings are invoked such as Ayurdā agnē āyurmē déhi'; but in view of the fact that the Wife is not learned in the Veda and hence would not be able to recite the said Mantras with the proper accent etc., the term 'Ashiḥ' should be taken as standing for Embellishments, such as bathing, anoint- ing, applying collyrium to the eyes and so forth; the term 'celibacy' also should be taken as standing for freedom from passions of all kinds". (Tupṭīkā). The Bhasya (Trs. P. 993) proceeds-What happens is this:-(a) There are certain details subserving the purposes of the Sacrifice which have been declared as to be performed by the 'Sacrificer', and as in all these texts the 'Sacrificer' is mentioned by means of a name in the Masculine Gender, these details would be performed by the Man, not by his Wife; (b) then there are certain details sub- serving the purposes of the 
the Sacrifice which have to be performed with Mantras; and these also could not be per- formed by the Wife, as she does not possess the requisite knowledge; nor can these texts themselves be taken as indicating the presence of such knowledge in women; as such indication would be justi- fiable only if the performance were impossible in the absence of such knowledge in the Wife; as a matter of fact, however, even in the absence of such knowledge in the Wife, the performance in question could be carried out by the Husband himself; hence 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
313 
there is no justification for assuming such knowledge in the Wife, and thus treating this as an exception to the general rule that prohibits Vedic Study for women. Hence it follows that the details requiring the reciting of Mantras should be performed by the Husband, not by the Wife. (c) As regards the 'Invoking of Blessings' and the 'Celibacy', these subserve the purposes of the Performer; so that these could not be regarded as complete if done by only one of the couple; because if only one of these did them, the Embellishment of the other would remain defective. In the texts enjoining these details, the 'Sacrificer' does not figure as the Subject, hence the Gender of the word has no significance; which means that these have to be done by both-the Man as well as his Wife. (d) What has been specifically laid down as to be done. by the Wife, e.g., the 'Examining of the Clarified Butter',-has to be done by her alone. From all this it follows that on account of this 'inequality' the Wife does not stand on the same footing as the Husband. 
(E) IS THE SHŪDRA ENTITLED TO PERFORM SACRIFICES ? 
The Shudra is not entitled to perform Sacrifices at all. The Established Conclusion on the subject has been thus formulated in the Sutra (6. 1. 26). The Agnihotra and such Sacrifices can be performed by the three Higher Castes only, as in connection with the Fire-installation Rite, these three only have been men- tioned; the Shudra therefore can have nothing to do with Sacrifices; specially as the Veda is related to the Brahmana and the other two castes only. The Fire-installation Rite has been enjoined in the text-The Brahmana should install the Fires during Spring, the Kṣattriya during Summer and the Vaishya during Autumn'; and there is no mention of the Shudra. Thus being without the duly- installed Fires, the Shudra cannot perform the Agnihotra and such other acts. The Ahavaniya and other consecrated fires being not available for the Shudra, he cannot be entitled to the perform- of those acts where these consecrated Fires are essential. (Bhasya Trs. pp. 995-996). (This view is quoted with approval by Prabhakara in Bṛhati, p. 111A). Apart from the Restrictive. text relating to the Fire-installation Rite, there is yet another Vedic text restricting the title to Sacrifices to the three Higher Castes only this text speaking of the Initiation as 
F. 40 
314 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
to be done to the Brahmana, the Kṣattriya and the Vaishya, -the Shudra being altogether omitted; and as no one is fit to perform Sacrifices without Initiation, the Shudra should be regarded as unfit for performing Sacrifices, on account of not having been 'initiated' into Vedic Study; and hence having not acquired the learning requisite for sacrificial performances. Being without the knowledge of Veda acquired in the proper manner, the Shūdra cannot have the requisite capacity and is therefore not entitled to perform Sacrifices. (Bhā. Trs. p. 1000). Nor is it pos- sible for the Shūdra to acquire the requisite knowledge later on; because such knowledge has been strictly forbidden for the Shüdra -the prohibitive text being 'The Shudra shall not read the Veda.' If he did read it, he must be only incurring sin, and not acquiring the title to perform Sacrifices. Even if it were possible for the Shudra to acquire the knowledge, he would not thereby become entitled to perform Sacrifices, as he would still be without the Consecrated Fires,-the installing of these having been restricted to the three higher castes (See above) (Bhāṣya Trs. p. 1000-1002). 
Prabhakara (Bṛhati Ms. p. 111A) says-'Rightly has the author of the Bhāṣya summed up the right view by declaring that it is by reason of his not having 'installed' the Fires that the Shūdra is not entitled to the performance of the Jyotistoma and other Sacrifices'. 
According to the Vedanta-Sutra (and Shankarāchārya) also, Shūdras are not entitled to perform Sacrifices. 
(F) THE RATHAKĀRA' AND THE 'NISADASTHAPATI' ARE ENTITLED TO PERFORM SACRIFICES 
There are two exceptions to the general exclusion of Shūdras from the performance of Sacrifices,-dealt with under Su. 6. 1. 44 -50 and Su. 6.1. 51-52. 
(a) It has been settled above that it is only the three Higher Castes that are entitled to the Installation of Fire. We have a Vedic text however laying down this Fire-installation to be done 'during the Rains', by the 'Rathakara'. Now who is this Rathakara? The literal meaning of the word is the chariot-maker. Does then the text refer to Fire-installation as to be done by a person of one of the higher castes who has taken up the profession 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
315 
of chariot-making? or is Rathakāra an altogether different. caste? The Established Conclusion on the question is that the persons meant by the word 'Rathakara' are the inferior Saudhanvanas’— says the Sutra (6. 1. 50); this caste is slightly inferior to the three higher castes. This case has been dealt with by Katyāyana in his Shrauta-Sutra (I. 11-12); from which we learn that the 'Rathakāra' is one whose mother is born of a Shüdra mother and a Vaishya Father; and the Commentator on Katyāyana remarks that the Fire-installation by this Rathakara is only for the purposes of purification, not for that of Sacrificial performances. 
(b) Similarly we have the Injunction-This Raudra Sacri- fice should be performed for the Nisada-sthapati'. The question arises in regard to the exact signification of the compound 'Niṣāda- sthapati'; does this stand for the 'chief' i.e., king, of the Nişă- das'? or for the king who is himself a Nişada? In the former case, there would be no difficulty, as the 'Chief of the Niṣādas' may belong to one of the three higher castes and hence fully entitled to the performance of the Raudra and also other Sacri- fices. In the latter case however, the chief, being himself a Niṣāda, would not be a member of any of the three higher castes, and hence not entitled to the performance of the Raudra or any other Sacrifice. 
The Established Conclusion on this question is that the word stands for the Chief who is himself a Nişada; such is the direct signification of the compound; as in this case the compound being Karmadharaya, both members of it retain their natural connota- tions; such is not the case if the compound is taken as Tatpuruşa, in the sense of 'Chief of Nisadas'. That the Chief of the Niṣāda- caste is meant is also indicated by the Vedic text laying down 'a false coin' as the Sacrificial Fee at the Raudra Sacrifice in ques- tion; as a 'false coin' is of use to Niṣādas only. (Bhasya Trs. p. 1012). This Nisada is a mixed caste; though he is devoid of Vedic learning, yet, in view of the Vedic text expressly enjoining the Raudra-Sacrifice for him, we have to take it that he is to learn up the texts for the occasion, needed for the performance of that Sacrifice. 
This man however has to perform the Sacrifice in the Fire consecrated for the occasion, as in his case there cannot be the 
316 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
regularly installed Fire of the Agnihotra, nor the Upanayana- Fire. (Su. 6. 8. 20-21). 
(G) DISQUALIFICATION FOR PERFORMERS OF SACRIFICES 
Jaimini has discussed some other incapacitating circumstances also-e.g., (1) Want of necessary wealth and (2) Physical disability. 
is 
The case of the man without wealth has been dealt with under Su. 6. 1. 39-40. The Established Conclusion is that the posses- sion of wealth is not a pre-requisite; it is not right that the man without wealth should not be entitled to perform Sacrifices; be- cause the possession of wealth is a variablle factor; no one 'devoid of wealth' by birth; there are always ways and means whereby even a poor man can become wealthy; so that the posses- sion of wealth can always be brought about as the need arises. (Bhasya Trs. p. 1003). 
The other incapacitating circumstance is considered under Su. 6. 1. 41; it is that of the man with bodily defect; and the conclusion is that a person with such defect is not necessarily ex- cluded from Sacrifices; as it is always possible that the man may become cured of the defect. 
But if the bodily defect is one that is congenital, or in any way incurable, then the man is not entitled to peform Sacrifices. (Sú. 42). 
The view of the Neo-Mimāmsakas—Mādhavächārya for in- stance is that it is only the Prospective (i.e., Kamya) Sacrifices to which such men are not entitled; they are entitled to perform the Compulsory and Contingent Sacrifices. 
A third incapacitating condition is considered under Sūtra 
6. 1. 43. 
In connection with the Darsha-Purnamasa, we have the Injunction of 'naming three Gotra-Rsis.' If a man is unable to name these three Rṣis, does he become excluded from Sacrifices? Yes, says Su. 6. 1. 43. 
But this does not mean that the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa can be performed only by those who can name three and only three Pravara-Rsis; all that is meant is that those who are unable to name three Reis are excluded. So that persons who can recount 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
317 
five Pravara-Rșis become entitled; this is made further .clear by the prohibition that 'more than five shall not be named'. (Tupṭākā.) 
The question as to who is entitled to perform Sacrifices has been dealt with systematically by Katyayana in his Shrauta-Sūtra (1.3-12). In Su. 3 he puts forward the view that all beings- animal, human and divine,-are equally entitled to the perfor- mance of Sacrifices. Su. 4 rejects this view and declares that human beings alone can be so entitled, as it is they alone that can really perform Sacrifices; the Deities cannot do so; the commen- tator Karka adds-because they have all their desires already ful- filled and do not stand in need of anything which they would seek to accomplish by means of Sacrifices; and also because apart from these Deities themselves, there is no 'Deity' to whom they could make offerings; the Rakṣasus and Pishachas cannot perform Sacrifices, as they are by their very nature, impure and hence un- fit for sacrificial performances; nor can animals offer Sacrifices, as they are devoid of the requisite Vedic learning. The dis- abilities in connection with human beings are mentioned in Sū. 5. Sacrifices cannot be performed by one who has one or more limbs wanting,-who is devoid of Vedic learning,-who is sexless,-and who is a Shudra. One who has no legs cannot perform the walking involved in the Tisnukrama prescribed in connection with Sacrifices (ide-Shata-Br. 1.1-2.13; 6.5.2.10; 6.6.4.1);-the blind cannot do the 'Examining' of the Clarified Butter; the dumb cannot recite the Mantras; and a Sacrifice in which these details are wanting would be no Sacrifice at all. One who is de- void of Vedic Learning is not entitled, because he cannot know what is to be done and how; the sexless person is not entitled; because the Scriptures have declared such a person to be 'impure' by his very nature. The Shudra also is not entitled. Sutra 6 declares that the Brahmana, the Kshatriya and the Vaishya alone are entitled to perform Sacrifices; because of declarations in the Veda to that effect; the Veda has restricted Fire-installation to the three higher castes only, and no Sacrifices can be performed without these Fires. 'Absence of Learning' is not a disqualifica- tion for the Shudra only; as it has been mentioned as a disquali- fication for all castes. Sutra 7 distinctly declares that women are as much entitled to the performance of Sacrifices as men; special- ly as it is found that the Veda enjoins the Initiation of the Sacri-318 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
ficer and his Wife, the former being initiated with the Mekhala and the latter with the Yoktra (Sutra 8). Karka however adds that women are entitled, but only as associated with their hus- bands, and not independently by themselves; he bases this dis- qualification upon a later Smrti text, which declares that 'there is no independent sacrificing for women'. He appears to have lost sight of the fact that the Man also is not entitled to perform Sacri- fices, except as associated with his wife. Under Sutra 11 and 12 Katyayana has dealt with the cases of the 'Rathakara' and the 'Nişādasthapati'. (See above.) 
(H) SATTRAS-COMMUNISTIC SACRIFICES 
Jaimini has devoted some special Sutras to the consideration of the question as to who are entitled to perform the Communistic Sacrifices, Sattras; this question turns upon the question as to who is the recipient of the rewards accruing from those Sacrifices. 
The question is-Who is to perform the Communistic Sacri- fices, like the Sattra? Is it each individual person of the 'Com- munity' desiring the whole fruit of the Sacrifice? or the whole Community', as a 'Community'? 
The Prima Facie View is 'that no individual singly should perform what has been enjoined for the entire 'Community' or Group. The whole Group collectively, as desiring the Result, should be the Performer, and the Result should also accrue to all of them collectively. 
as 
The Established Conclusion is as follows:-Inasmuch each man helps in the accomplishment of the desired end, the title to the performance should be taken as accruing to each. (Sūtra 6.2.1). As a rule when an act is done by several persons together, each of them helps in the accomplishment of the desired end; and the Result of an act should always accrue to the per- former of that act; and in the case in question, each of the per- sons concerned is a 'Performer' of the Sacrifice. So that even though the performance has been undertaken by them collectively, the Result should accrue to each of them severally. (Bhāṣya— Trs., p. 1014.) 
The Sattra differs from the ordinary Sacrifice in that-(1) it cannot be performed by one man (Su. 10.6.45-50, and 10.6.59-60). 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
319 
and (2) all the priests are from among the 'Sacrificers' themselves (10.6.51-58), (3) for this same reason there is no appointment' of Priests (Su.. 10.2.35, Bha. Trs. 1698); and the services of the Priests at the Sattra are not 'bought' or 'exchanged', for any promised 'Fee' (10.2.35-38); and the gift of 'a mare or a slave- girl or a cow', which is prescribed in connection with the Sarasvata- Isti (which forms part of the procedure of the Sattra) has been regarded as fulfilling a transcendental result, (10.2.44-45), and not the effect of securing the services' of the Priests.-which is the usual purpose served by Fees. (See 10.2.44). If one of the Sacrificers at the Sattra should happen to die during the perfor- mance, his bones have to be kept wrapped in deer-skin, and his place at the Sacrifice is to be taken up by a person nearly related to him, and at the end of the year, the Sacrificers should perform, for the sake of their dead partner, a special Sacrifice called the Samvatsara-yāga' (Sū. 10.2.47-48) All the seventeen persons performing the Sattra should belong to the same Brahmaṇa sub- sect; i.e.; they should all be followers of the same Kalpa-Sutra (Sū. 6.6.1-11). But at the Kulayayajña, it is possible for the King and his Priest to belong to different Kalpas (Sū. 6.6.12-15). Ksatriyas and Faishyas cannot perform Sattras, to which Brah- maņas alone are entitled; and of these also, only those who belong to the Vishramitra-Gotra; and of these last, only such as are guided by the same Kalpa, (Su. 6.6.15-26). All persons perform- ing the Sattra should be regular performers of the Agnihotra (6. 6.27-42). To the Samidheni however all 'Regenerate' (Dvija) persons are equally entitled (Su. 6.6.36-39). The Juhū and other Implements used at the Sattra should be kept common among all the Sacrificers, and nothing should belong exclusively to any one Sacrificer. The reason for this lies in the fact that if any implement belongs to any one person, in the event of his death, it would have to be burnt along with his body, and this would interfere with the performance. (Sū. 6.6.33-35.) 
To the performance of the Vishwajit Sacrifice, only such persons are entitled as can afford to give 112 pieces of Gold. (Su. 6.7.18-20.) 
The possibility of several performers at the Communistic Sacrifices might lead people to believe that there may be several performers at the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa and such Sacrifices also, 
320 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
But the conclusion is that at all of them, there is to be a single Performer at each performance. In fact, that is the normal law; if at the Communistic Sacrifices like the Sattra, there are several performers, those are special cases, special'y provided for by special Vedic Injunctions; e.g., in regard to the Sattra it has been enjoined that 'there are to be at least Seventeen Performers'. (Sutra 6.2.3-12.) 
In regard to Sacrifices enjoined as to be performed for the purpose of bringing about visible results, such as Rain, Cattle and so forth,-the rule is that when the performance has once begun, it must be carried to its end,-even if the result desired should happen to be accomplished before its completion; as the Veda deprecates incomplete acts and prescribes expiatory rites for leaving Sacrifices unfinished; and also because cultured people decry men who begin an act but do not carry it out to the end,- says Bṛhati (MS., p. 113B).-(6.2. 13-15). But this rule does not apply to such purely secular acts as the building of a house; because the aforesaid depreciation of unfinished acts is based upon the consideration that when a Sacrificial Act has been begun, an expectation of receiving offerings is raised in the minds of the Deities concerned, and hence if all the prescribed offerings are not made, it becomes a case of breach of promise. Such is not the case with the purely secular acts; specially as the said depreca- tion is based upon the fact that the Veda has prescribed expiation for unfinished Sacrifices; and this could not apply to the secular acts. (Su. 6.2. 16-18)-(Bṛhati, p. 113B.) 
(1) PROHIBITIONS-EXACT SIGNIFICATION 
Sūtras 6.2. 19-20 raise all interesting question regarding Prohibitions. The Veda contains Injunctions as well as Prohibi- tions. We have been dealing with the question of Persons being entitled or not-entitled to the performance of the acts enjoined by the Injunctions. The question raised now is in regard to the Prohibitions. Who are the persons who are entitled to act in accordance with the Prohibitions? Are they persons who desire for themselves certain results expected to follow from the avoid ance of acts mentioned in the Prohibitory Texts? Or are the Texts meant for, and applicable to, all men irrespectively of any desire for results? For instance, when the Veda prohibits the Eating 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
321 
of Garlic,-does it mean that here we have the positive act of vow- ing act-to abstain from Garlic? Or does the text only lay down. the Negative act of not-eating garlic? 
The Prima Facie View on the question is that the text should be taken as laying down the positive act, the taking of the vow, which thus becomes a Dharma, which, in the absence of the men- tion of any other result, may be taken as leading to Heaven, in accordance with the 'Vishwajit-Law' (Su. 4.3.10). The reason in favour of this view,-according to Prabhakara (Brhati MSS.. p. 113B) is that all Injunctive verbs lay down positive acts for the accomplishing of certain desirable results, and there is no reason why the Prohibitive Injunction also should not be regarded as lay- ing down a positive act, something to be done, a mere avoidance of garlic (in the case in question), which would bring about some desirable result. 
The Established Conclusion however is that in the text pro- hibiting the Eating of Garlic, the negative word must be taken as enjoining the negative, or avoidance, of the act of Eating Garlic, and not any positive act. All injunctions of Positive Acts lay down something to be done; but the Prohibitive text does not lay down anything to be done; what it lays down is the not-doing of a cer- tain act; it cannot therefore be taken as the Injunction of a positive act. Nor would such Prohibition be entirely purposeless; as it would serve the purpose of saving man from the horrors of Hell which would be his lot if he ate garlic. This explanation of the Prohibitive text saves us from the necessity of assuming a Result (in the shape of Heaven) as following from the said Avoidance, an assumption for which there is no justification. As to who is en- titled to act in accordance with the Prohibition, the conclusion is that it is the person who fears the horrors of Hell and desires to save himself from them; not the Person who desires Heaven. For these reasons Prohibitions have been regarded as not contemplat- ing any desirable positive results, they contemplate only the saving from undesirable results; and from this it follows as a necessary corollary that what is prohibited leads to undesirable. results. These Prohibitions do not stand on the same footing as the Prohibition of certain acts for the Religious Student; because the latter is avowedly prefaced by the words 'Atha vratam'-'Now follow the Observances', which are positive by their nature. 
F. 41 
322 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
As for these Observances and other Duties prescribed for the Religious Student,-the man becomes entitled to these, only after his Initiation, (Upanayana),—not immediately after Birth; so they pertain to the three Higher Castes only, for whom alone there is Upanayana-(Sũ. 6.2. 21-22).--These Duties have been laid down specifically for the Religious Student, only during the period of Studentship. (Bṛhati MS., p. 118.) 
The Agnihotra has been enjoined as to be performed 'through- out one's life'. But this does not mean that the performance is to be carried on incessantly and continuously; all that is meant is that the acts prescribed in connection with the Agnihotra should be performed regularly every day at the times prescribed for them; and as these times prescribed are morning and evening, the offerings have to be made every morning and every evening. Similarly with the Darsha-Purnamasa Sacrifices also; which also have been prescribed as to be performed 'throughout life'; in this case the performances have to come only on the prescribed days- which are the Moonless and Full-Moon days. (Su. 6.2. 23-26.) The performances have to be repeated on every Moonless and Full- Moon day; just as the Agnihotra has to be performed every morn- ing and every evening. (Sū. 6.2. 27-28.) 
In connection with these repeated performances of the Agni- hotra and the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa on the prescribed days through- out life, the general principle has been deduced that in the case of every prescribed contingent act, the act has to be repeated every time that the contingency appears. For instance,-(a) there are certain rites to be performed when a pot happens to be broken, or a sacrificial material happens to be spoilt; these rites should be performed each time that there is such breakage or spoiling, (Eū. 6.2.29); (b) it has been enjoined that the pupil should salute the Teacher when he happens to meet him; and the conclusion is that he should do this on every occasion that he happens to meet him. (Sū. 6.2.30.) 
This is with reference to the Contingent Acts. There are certain Acts which, in the way that they are prescribed, bear the resemblance of Contingent Acts; for instance, the Study of the Veda for paying off one's debts to the Rsis, the Performance of Sacrifices (E.g., Soma-Sacrifice) for paying off one's debts to the Deities, and the Begetting of Children for paying off one's debts 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
323 
to the Pitys. The question is-Are these acts to be performed by all persons? Or by only those who have incurred the debts and wish to pay them off, or wish to acquire by their means certain rewards, in the shape of Ileaven? The conclusion is that they have to be performed by all men, so that they are compulsory, not contingent or prospective; and as such, they have to be performed by all men of the three higher castes, irrespectively of any desire for results.-(Sū. 6.2.31.) 
CAPACITY FOR PERFORMANCE 
The question as to who is entitled to the performance of Sacrifices leads on to the allied question as to his ability or capacity to perform them; and in this connection we have to con- sider the chances of a man completing the undertaken Sacrifice under certain circumstances. 
a 
In regard to the performance of the Agnihotra, the Darsha- Pūrṇamāsa and other compulsory and life-long acts, it has been held that in case one is not capable of performing the act with all its details and subsidiaries, he need perform the Principal only in full and may omit the Subsidiary details,--but only in case he is absolutely and really incapable, beyond all help. (Sú. 6.2.1-7.) 
This however applies only to the compulsory Acts; in the case of the Prospective Acts-those performed for the purpose of ob- taining certain desirable results, the entire procedure has to be gone through scrupulously; as the omission of the slightest detail would make the action defective and render it nugatory, unable to bring about the desired result. (Sū. 6.3. 8-10.) 
The capacity or ability to perform a Sacrifice turns also upon the ability to secure the proper materials and things necessary for the performance. In connection with the materials, it has been held that in case the material prepared for the offering becomes spilt or otherwise rendered unfit for use,-even in the middle of the performance, if a prescribed substitute is available and is used for the remaining offerings,-the performance of the Sacri- fice cannot be regarded as spoilt in any way. (Su. 6.3. 11—17.) But the substitute must be something similar to the original; for instance, the Yara for the Frihi. (Sū. 6.3.27.) In case however, another supply of the original substance is available, this should have preference over all substitutes. (Su, 6.3.35.) But in no 
324 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
case can we substitute a subtance the use of which has been prohi- bited; such substances, for instance, as the Maşa, the Chaṇaka and such other substances as have been called 'Ayajñiya', 'unfit for Sacrifices'. In the case of the offering of Cakes, if, in course of baking, the Cake happens to be burnt or otherwise spoilt, another Cake is permitted to be used, but only after certain expiatory rites have been performed. (Su. 6.4. 17-21.) 
(Sū. 6.4. 17-21.) If the consecrated Fire becomes extinguished, it should be rekindled with all the rites of Fire-installation. (Su. 6.4. 17-27.) 
Though substitutes have been permitted in the case of Sub- stances, they are not permitted in the case of Deities or Mantras; if the Deity happens to be wrongly named, or the Mantra happen to be wrongly recited, the whole performance becomes nugatory and cannot be remedied. (Sū. 6.3. 18-19.) 
Lastly, as regards the Sacrificer, if anything happen to him and he becomes disabled from taking part in the performance, then the action fails entirely; as no substitute can be permitted for the Sacrificer. (Su. 6.3.21.) In the case of Sattras however, where there are seventeen Sacrificers, if one happen to become dis- abled, his place can be taken by some one else; the reason for this is that in the case of Sattras all the Sacrificers take part in the performance, not only as 'Sacrificers' or 'Masters', but also as 'Priests' (there being no Priests at the Sattra apart from the Sacrificers themselves); and as even during the performance, a change of Priests is permissible, the disabled Sacrificer, who has been acting as Priest, can, on that account, be replaced by an- other. (Su. 6.8.22.) But such a substitute can be treated as a 'Sacrificer' only for the purpose of making up the statutory number 'Seventeen'; he does not partake of the Result. (Sū. 6. 3.23.) The real reason for the exception to the General Principle of the Non-Substitution of the Sacrificer appears to be in expedi- ency; in the case of the usual Sacrifice with a single Sacrificer, his own disability leading to the failure of the performance, such failure would be easily tolerated; but in the case of the Sattra where there are seventeen Sacrificers, if only one of them becomes disabled, during the performance, the other sixteen would not be willing to forego the elaborate Sacrifice and its much-coveted reward; and further, as there would be Seventeen persons con- cerned, there would be a greater likelihood of one becoming dis- 
CHAPTER XXVI: SACRIFICER 
325 
abled; hence some latitude had to be allowed in this case. In case any one of these Seventeen Sacrificers should wish to retire after the performance has begun, he may do so, but he should have to perform the Vishvajit Sacrifice in expiation of his failure to fulfil his commitments. (Su. 6.5.25-27.) 
(J) INITIATION 
The Sacrificer has to undergo Intiation at the very outset. In connection with the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa Sacrifice,-in regard to the Initiation several numbers have been mentioned-'One, two, three, four and twelve'; which means that the Initiation has to be performed on one day, on two days, on three days, on four days, on twelve days. The question is-Is there to be no restriction and one may choose any one of the numbers? or should the number twelve alone be adopted? The Prima Facie View is that "in regard to the extent of the Initiation one may do what one likes”. (Sa. 6.5.28.) The Established Conclusion is that it should extend over twelve days. (Su. 6.5.29.) 
Such is the explanation provided by Shabara (Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 1129). Neither Kumarila (in the Tupțikā) nor Mandana Mishra (in the Mimamsānukramaṇikā) accepts this presentation of the Topic. According to these, Sutras 28 and 29 embody two distinct Topics. In the former Topic embodied in Su. 28, the question is- Must there be twelve days' Initiation? Or is there to be option? The Prima Facie View is that there must be twelve days Initiation. The Established Conclusion is that one may do as one likes (Su. 28); i.e., there is to be no restriction. In the second Topic em- bodied in Su. 29, the question is-Does the aforesaid option hold regarding all the Ectypes of the Archetype? Or is there any re- striction? The Prima Facie View is that, according to Sutra 28 there is absolute option at the Archetype, and hence there should be the same at the Ectypes also. The Established Conclusion is that at the Ectypes, and specially at the Deadashāha Sacrifice,--- the twelve days Course must be adopted. 
VISHVAJIT SACRIFICE 
There is an interesting point discussed in connection with the is Vishvajit-Sacrifice. The Fee prescribed for this Sacrifice 'Survasva' 'one's entire Property', his 'all belongings'; and the 
326 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Established Conclusion is that the term 'all belongings' stands for the Sacrificer's riches and wealth, and not his parents and such relations; (Su. 6.7. 1-2); of the Wealth also, the Horse should not be given away, because the giving away of 'animals with mein' has been specially forbidden. (Su. 6.7.4);-the entire 'Earth', the Terrestrial Globe, should not be given away by any one, as it does not belong to any one. (Su. 6.7.3.) When giving away his entire belongings' one should give away such things as are actually in his possession at the time, and he should not secure new things merely for giving away. (Su. 6.7.5.) One should not give away the Shudra who is serving him for the pur- pose of acquoring knowledge of Dharma. In fact, no Shudra can be legally acquired as 'property', against his will. (Sū. 6.7.6.) The term 'all belongings' does not include all that the man has possessed in the past, or all that may come to him in the future; it means only what he is actually possessed of at the time of the gift. (Su. 6.7.7.) Whenever the Veda enjoins the giving away of 'unmeasured wealth', it is only much wealth that is meatnt. (Sū. 6.7.22); and it should be taken definitely as standing for 'more than a thousand' gold-pieces. (Su. 6.7. 23-25.) Similar- ly, when a Sacrifice is enjoined as to be performed 'for a thousand years', it is to be taken as standing for a thousand days. In con- nection with this, several interpretations have been suggested in the Sutras as Prima Facie View: (1) That the thousand-year Sacrifice is really performed for a thousand years, and is meant for Performers who are Superhuman; (2) it should be performed for a thousand years, and by human beings,-but by several genera- tions; (3) Thousand Years' stand for thousand months. All this has been rejected; the accepted view being that 'years' stands for days. 
Fire-installation is not necessary for certain offerings such as the Chaturhotra-Homa, which is to be offered by persons who have not installed their own Fire. (Su. 6.8. 1-10.) The offerings made at the Upanayana are to be made in the ordinary Fire. (Sū. 6.8. 11-19.) So also the Sacrifice called Sthapati-1ṣṭi (Sū. 6.8. 20-21); also the Expiatory Sacrifice of the Avakirni (Sū. 6.8.22). So that for the performance of all this, those persons also are en- titled who have not installed their own Fires. 
There are certain other important matters of general interest that have been dealt with towards the end of Discourse VI. (1) All 
CHAPTER XXVI: 
SACRIFICER 
327 
Daiva Acts, i.e., Acts performed in honour of Deities, should be done during the Northern Solstice of the Sun, during the Brighter Fortnight and in the Forenoon. (Su. 6.8.23); all Pitrya Acts- in honour of Pitrs-should be done during the Darker Fortnight, and in the afternoon, (Su. 6.8.25);—(3) at the Jyotistoma and other Sacrifices, the observance of Living on milk' is compulsory and essential-(Sü. 6.8.28); but the observance of the rule of 'Eating in the latter part of the night' is not essential-(Sú, 6.8. 29). (4) The animal sacrificed at the Sacrifice must be a goat, (Su. 6.8. 30-42).CHAPTER XXVII 
ATIDESHA -TRANSFERENCE OF DETAILS 
This closes our study of the first Six Discourses of the Sutra: which, as explained by the Bhasya (Trs., p. 1229), have discussed the procedure of the Darsha-Pūrṇmāsa and other Sacrifices, the details of which have been directly prescribed in the Veda, while the later Six Discourses discuss the procedure of the Aindragna and such other Sacrifices, the details of whose procedure have not been directly enjoined. Kumārila however, puts the matter some- what differently:-In the first Six Discourses we have discussed the direct Injunctions bearing upon the Archetypal as well as Eetypal Sacrifices, and with the Seventh Discourse begins the dis- cussion of the Transference or Extended Application, by indirect implication, of details from the sphere of one Sacrifice to that of another. (Tupṭīkā.) 
The conclusion regarding the latter Sacrifices is that these also have all their details; but, not having been directly enjoined for them, these details come to them through Atidësha, Transfer- ence. This "Transference' is that process by which the details prescribed in connection with one Sacrifice are extended beyond that Sacrifice and transfered to another Sacrifice. For instance, after having given full directions regarding the feeding of Devadatta, one says 'Feed Yajñadatta also like Devadatta'. This Transference can be done either by Name or by a Declaration. The Name that is made such a means of Transference is of three kinds (1) Name of the Act, (2) Name of the Embellishment and (3) Etymological Name. The Declaration is of two kinds- (1) Direct (Perceptible) and (2) Indirect (Inferred).-(Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 1239-1240). 
There are several Sacrifices in connection with which the Veda does not specifically prescribe all the necessary details, but declares that such and such a Sacrifice shall be performed in the manner of such and such another Sacrifice'; for instance, with regard to the Isu-Sacrifice, after having declared its peculiar fea- tures, the Vedic text goes on to declare that 'the rest is like the Shyena-Sacrifice'. In such cases, the Shyĕnd-Sacrifice would be 
328 
CHAPTER XXVII: TRANSFERENCE 
329 
called the 'Prakṛti', Archetype, and the Zṣu-Sacrifice, the corres- ponding 'Vikṛti', Ectype. The Transference, then, of the details of the Archetype to the Ectype is what is called 'Atidisha', which has been defined as 'that process whereby a detail becomes extended in its application from the Primary act to other acts cognate to it'. (Bhā. Trs. p. 1239). The Prakaraṇapañchikā (p. 227) has defined it as 'that through which the Ectype becomes connected with the details of the Archetypal Sacrifice', or 'the Extension of the details of one Sacrifice to another, when there is no incongruity in such extension'. 
Before proceeding with the main subject of Transference, Jaimini has devoted the first twelve Sutras of Discourse 7, to the discussion of a question upon which the whole subject of Trans- ference rests. In the context of the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa Sacrifice, the Vedic text has enjoined the Prayāja-offerings as the subsi- diary details. The question to be considered is-Are these Prayājas meant for the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa only or for all Sacri- fices? This enquiry becomes necessary at this stage, because. if the subsidiaries laid down under one context are intended by the Veda for all Sacrifices, then the Prayaja-offerings appertain as much to the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa as to any other Sacrifice; so that in this case, the question of the Transference of the details does not arise at all; as the details appertain to all Sacrifices equally. If however the details mentioned under the Context of one Sacri- fice appertain to that Sacrifice only, then, if there is need for them in other Sacrifices, they can go over to these latter only by Transference; and in this case alone could these latter Sacrifices be the Ectypes of the former Sacrifice which, thus, would be the Archetype. It is only in this case that there would be an occasion for the consideration of the subject of Transference and other cognate subjects dealt with by the Sutra in Discourses 7 to 12. 
This question, as to whether the Details laid down in the section on Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa belong to these alone or to all Sac- refices, turns upon the further question as to whether the perform- ance of the said Details is meant only for the accomplishment of the Sacrifices, or for the bringing about of an Apurva; because, in the former case, as all Sacrifices would be equally Sacrifice, what is laid down for the fulfilment of the 'Sacrifice' would natu- rally be related to all Sacrifices equally,-while, in the latter case, 
F. 42 
330 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
the details would be related to only one Apurva, and this one Apurva could not but be the one following from the Sacrifice in whose context the details would be mentioned; as it is only of such Sacrifices, that the said Details could be Subsidiary-as explained under Discourse III. And in this case therefore, the Details in question would appertain definitely to only one Sacrifice, and they could become connected with other Sacrifices. only through Transference. 
The Established Conclusion on this question is that the said Details are related to the Apurra, as is clearly indicated by the requirements of the Context. (Su. 7.1.1-12). 
Before we deal with the special cases of Transference, we have to note that there is Transference, not only of Actions or Procedure, but also of other Sacrificial Details, like Substances and so forth. Says the Prakarapañchika (p. 27) अतिदेशः प्रकारस्य धर्माणां चैव युज्यते । It is only of the Result that there is no Transference, as explained under Sutra 7.1.20-22. The only general law relating to Trans- ference is प्रकृतिवद् विकृतिः कर्तव्या "The Eetype is to be performed in the manner of the Archetype'; e.g., the Isu-Sacrifice in the manner of the Shyena-Sacrifice and so forth. What is meant by this 'manner of the Archetype' is that all those details and accessories which are necessary in the performance of the Ecytype, and yet are not found to be enjoined directly in reference to that Ectype, are to be brought in, transferred to, it from the Archetype. It is true, as the Prakaranapañchika remarks (p. 226), that the first of the Details that come up for Transference are those cons- stituting the Procedure; but that is not all; if the offering-material has not been laid down in connection with the Ectype specifically, that also has to be brought in from the Archetype; similarly, other accessory details that might be wanting. Nor does this in any way militate against the opening Sutras of Discourse 10, because there we have the denial of the Transference of only such details of the Archetype as have had their purpose already fulfilled, and which, on that account, could serve no useful purpose at the Ectype-similarly under Su. 5.1.19, we have an instance of the details of the Archetype not being transferred to the Ectype, thro- ugh the force of Direct Declaration, whose authority is above everything, and so also above the General Law regarding the Transference of Details from the Archetype to the Eetype. Thus 
CHAPTER XXVII: TRANSFERENCE 
331 
then, the Transference of Details being in accordance with the actual needs of the Ectypal Sacrifice, the need or motive that prompts this Transference may lie either in some transcendental Result expected to follow from what is transferred, or in some pure- ly visible result expected to be accomplished better by what is transferred than 
than by any other means. (Prakaraṇapañchikā p. 227). 
The question then that is to be dealt with is-In what cases is the Transference possible or desirable? And in what cases is it not so? It is on this question that the second half of the Sutras of Jaimini (Discourses 7 to 12) turns. 
This Transference of Details is regulated by (1) Context (Prakarana) and (2) Position (Sthāna) For instance, (1) the details of one Sacrifice will be transferred to another only if the two are found enjoined in the same Context; this is the reason why the details of the Shyëna-Sacrifice are transferred to the Iṣu-Sacrifice, not to the Saurya or other Sacrifices; and (2) in this Transference, that which occupies the Position of the Deity at the Archetype shall take the same place at the Ectype to which it is transferred; what appears in the Archetype as the offering-material shall be used at the Ectype also as the offering-material. 
Primarily, there are four kinds of Transference. (1) Trans- ference by Direct Injunction; e.g., with regard to the Isu-Sacrifice, we have the Direct Injunction to the effect that "The rest of it is like the Shyena'; which enjoins the Transference of the Details of the Shyena-Sacrifice to the Işu-Sacrifice. (Vide Sû. 7. 1. 13–16). (2) Transference by Presumed Injunction; e.g., in connection with the Saurya-Sacrifice we find uo accessory details prescribed; we know at the same time that no sacrifice can be performed without certain details; we know also that the Saurya bears a close rela- tionship to the Dursha-Pūrṇamāsa-Sacrifice; from all this we are led to the natural presumption that the details necessary for the Saurya are to be transferred to it from the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa; and this Presumption leads to the Inference of an Injunction sanctioning such Transference. (Vide Su. 7. 4. 1). (3) Trans- ference through Name; e.g., the Masagnihotra has not all its details laid down in connection with itself; and these details are transfered to it from the Primary Agnihotra; the only justifica- tion for this transference lies in the name 'Agnihotra' which is 
332 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
common to both. (Vide Sú. 7. 3. 1-4)-[That the Masagnihotra is entirely different from the Agnihotra has been shown in the Su. 2. 3. 24]. (4) Transference through the name of Embel- lishments (Samskāras); e.g., in connection with the Varunapra- ghasa-Sacrifice, we find the Arabhṛtha Bath enjoined; this Acablytha-Bath is an Embellishment the details whereof have been prescribed in connection with Agnistoma-Sacrifice; now this same name 'Avabhṛtha', occuring in connection with the Bath connected with the Varunaspraghāsa, leads to the conclusion that the details of this Bath are to be transferred to the Varunaspra- ghasa from those enjoined in connection with the Agnistoma. (Vide Sū. 7. 3. 12-15). In this connection, regarding Trans- ference through Name, some writers have introduced a third kind of Name-the 'name' applying to the Sacrifice in its literal signification; this literal signification of the names of Sacrifices being, according to these writers, a guide as to the Transference of Details to them. (See Mimamsabal prakasha pp. 118-119). This view however has been rejected by Kumārila (Ţupṭīkā 7. 1. 5), who says 
'No name, in its etymological sense 
can be indicative of Transference'. 
'Transference by Presumed Injunction' is of three kinds- (1)Transference of Injunction;-an example of this we have cited above; in connection with the Saurya and the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa: --(2) Transference of Substratum; and instance of this is found under Sü. 2. 1. 25-26, where it is shown that the Sentence-'One should make an offering of Curds if the Sacrificer be desirous of acquiring efficient Sense-organs'-enjoins only a particular sub- stance in the shape of Curds; and the Substratum of this offering -i.e., the Sucrifice at which the Curd is to be offered, is got at through Transference, the Agnihotra being the Sacrifice at which the said Curd-offering is to be made;-(3) Transference of Substitutes; an instance of this has been mentioned under, Su. 3. 5. 47-51; where we find that in the event of certain Sacrifices being performed by the Kṣattriya or the Vaishya, it has been laid down that when these persons, as Sacrificers, wish to eat the 'Remnant', they are to be given, not the Remnant of the Soma-juice, but a decoction of l'ata-seeds mixed with Curds; from this Injunction of the Substitute for Soma-juice, it is inferred that the said decoction is to be substituted, pot for the Eating only, but also for the offering; that is, when the Sacrifice is per- 
CHAPTER XXVII: TRANSFERENCE 
333 
formed by the Kṣattriya or the Vaishya, the substance offered at the Sacrifice is to consist of the said Decoction,-not of Soma- juice. 
Under Su. 8. 1. 1-2-it is shown that when certain particular details are to be transferred to any Sacrifice, those details should, as a rule, be those that have been enjoined in connection with any one Sacrifice,-they should not be borrowed from several Sacrifices; and the General Principle governing such Transfer- ence is as follows:-'When the slightest common factor,-in the shape of Word, Sense, Offering-Material, Deity, or the Form or other qualifications of these-happen to be perceived (between two Sacrifices), the Procedure of the one should be adopted at the other'. (Bhagya, Trs., p. 1322). 
CHAPTER XXVIII 
CHA-MODIFICATION 
We have seen that in several cases, the Accessory Details of one Sacrifice are transferred to another Sacrifice. In some cases it so happens that the particular Detail so transferred does not quite fit in with the other details of the Sacrifice to which it has been transferred. In this case therefore, the detail transferred has to be 'modified' to suit the exigencies of the Sacrifice to which it has been transferred. This 'Modification' of Details we have to consider now. 
As a preliminary to the discussion on Modification, it is necessary to consider the question-Are the details in question prompted by that is, performed for the purpose of accomplish- ing the transcendental Apurea, or by the Sacrificial Act? If they are prompted by the Apurva,, then alone is the Modification possible; as the Apurva of every Sacrifice is different from that of another Sacrifice; if, on the other hand, they are prompted by the Sacrificial Act, then there would be a commixture of Details; because all Sacrifices are equally 'Sacrificial Acts', hence all details would be admissible at all. 
The question has been placed in another way also in the Bhasya (Trs. P. 1418-1419): (1) Are the Details contingent upon the Sacrificial Act and prompted by the Apurva? or are they both contingent upon, and prompted by, the Apurva? The answer is that the details are prompted by the Apurva (Bhā. Trs. p. 1419); and also contingent upon the Apurva. Hence the con- clusion is that the purra is the prompter as well as the contin- gent cause of the Details. (Bha. Trs. p. 1420). 
The following are u few instances of Details prompted by and related to the Apurra: -(1) The Details of the Agnihotra are related to the Apurva (Su. 9.1.1.); (2) The loudness or other- wise of the recitation of a Mantra is related to the final Apūrva. (Su. 9.1.3); (3) the Details connected with the Fruit and the Deity are regulated by, and related to, the Apūrva, 9.1. 4-5.) 
334 
CHAPTER XXVIII: MODIFICATION 
335 
In connection with the last instance, we find the important principle enunciated that Details are not prompted by the Deity; that is, details are not dependent upon the nature of the Deity. This is an important matter, as setting forth the Mimamsaka's conception of the Derata, Deity, of Sacrifices. We shall therefore set forth the Topic in some detail. 
The Prima Facie View has been thus set forth in the Bhasya (Trs., p. 1429). "The Deity should be taken as prompting the Details of the Sacrifice, because the Feeding is for the sake of the Deity, as in the case of the Guest-(Sü. 9.1.6.) All Deities should be regarded as prompters of Details; because what is call- ed 'Sacrifice' is only the 'Feeding of the Deity'; what is done at the Sacrifice is that an eatable substance is offered to the Deity; and the act is that of giving or offering, of which the Deity is the recipient; in this way the Deity cannot be regarded as a subordi- nate factor; on the contrary, the Substance offered and the act of offering are both subordinate to the Deity. Then again, the Sacrifice is a form of worship of the Deity, and the act of worship must be subordinate to the object worshipped. The case of the Deity should be analogical to the case of the Guest; whatever service is rendered to the Guest is regarded as prompted by the Guest; similarly, whatever is done in the course of the Sacrificial Offering to the Deities, should be regarded as prompted by these Deities. It has to be admitted, in this connection, that the Deity has a physical body and actually eats what is offered. That this is so is clearly indicated (a) by Smṛti-texts, (b) by Custom and (c) by Indicative Vedic Texts. (A) There are Smpti-terts clearly declaring that Deities have material bodies, and Smṛti-texts are authoritative; (b) it is customary with people to treat the Deity as having a material body; for instance, they paint the Deity Faruna with a noose in his hand, and so forth; (c) lastly, there is a Vedic text where the Deity Indra is accosted with the words-0, Indra, I take hold of your right hand'.-That the Deity actually eats the offerings is laso indicated by-(a) Smyti-texts, (b) Custom and (e) Indicative Vedic texts. (a) There are Smrti-texts actually as- serting that the Deities eat the things offered; (b) People treat Deities as if they actually ate the offerings; and (c) There are such Vedic texts as clearly indicate such eating and drinking by Deities; e.g., the Mantra addressed to Indra says:-'0, Indra please eat and drink what has been offered.' That the substances offered are 
336 
PŪRVA-MĪMÄMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
still visible is due to the fact that it is only the Essence of the Substances that is eaten or drunk by the Deities. From the same sources again, we learn that Deities own property also; for instance, (a) there are Smyti-texts declaring that the Deity owns property; (b) the Custom is current of dedicating landed property to Deities; (c) Vedic texts speak of Indra as the 'master of Heaven', which also indicates that Deities own property. (Su. 9.1.7.)" 
As against the above Prima Facie View, the Established Con- clusion, set forth under Su. 9.1. 9-10, is as follows:-In fact, it is the objective of the Sacrifice-i.e., the Apūrva-that should be regarded as the principal factor; because the matter is one that can be determined only by the Vedic Word: and the Deity is spoken of only as a subordinate factor. (Sū. 9.1.9.). The Vedic Word clearly asserts that the Fruit of the Sacrifice proceeds from the act of Sacrifice, not from the Deity. The Deity and the offering-material are both accomplished entities, while the Act of Sacrifice is what is to be accomplished; from all this it is clear that the Deity cannot be the prompter of Details. In fact, that alone can be regarded as the prompter of Details which brings about the desired Result; hence it is the Apurva that should be regarded as the Prompter of the Details. The view set forth above makes it necessary to admit of Deities having material bodies and actually eating and drinking the Substances offered; and this idea is utterly repugnant to the Veda, which does not lend support to any such idea regarding Deities. The text quoted above regard- ing the 'right hand' of Indra does not mean that 'Indra has got a right hand'; what it means is 'We have taken hold of what is Indra's right hand': because even so, the text cannot be taken as literally true; because even if Indra has a 'right hand', it cannot be possible for any human being to take hold' of it. As regards the invocational words addressed to the Deity, these are not meant to be addressed literally; they are meant only to indicate the parti- cular Deity; and the sense of the invocational words would be mere eulogy, the sense of the Eulogy being that 'the Deity is such an efficient instrument of accomplishing the desired result that it accomplishes it, on being invoked, in the same manner as ordinary persons equipped with bodies and organs, etc. Having been thus invoked, if the Deity is told 'I have taken hold of your hand', all that these words mean is that 'we are dependent upon you', and 
CHAPTER XXVIII: MODIFICATION 
337 
this serves the purpose of reminding us that we should proceed to perform the rites in honour of this particular Deity. As regards the text speaking of the 'fist of Indra holding Heaven and Earth', all that it means is the praise of Indra, the sense being that 'Indra is such a being that if he had a fist, it would be so large as to be able to hold Heaven and Earth'. Thus there is no Vedic text that could justify the presumption that Deities have bodies like human beings. The texts that speak of the 'arms' of Indra being 'hairy', or his eyes as 'tawny'all these are purely eulogistic. Nor is there actual feeding or eating at Sacrifices; in fact, the Deity never eats; hence the argument that 'the feeding is for the Deity' (Su. 9.1.6) is not true. In fact, the idea of the Deities actually eating the offering-materials is nega- tived by the fact that Deities have no material body. If the Deities actually ate the substances offered, then these would dimi- nish in quantity. Nor is there any proof for the assertion that "the Deities partake of the Essence only of the viands offered and hence there is no dimnishing of the quantity." We cannot there- fore accept the notion that the Deities actually eat the offerings. Then again, it is not possible for the Deity to own property; and not owning anything, it acnnot give anything; the texts generally quoted as indicative of the fact of Deities owning property are purely eulogistic. From all this it follows that the Deity cannot be the prompter of Details. The case of the Deities is not the same as that of the Guest. (Bhasya, Trs., pp. 1432-1437.) 
• 
According to the Bhāṭṭabhaskara (MS., pp. 92-93) there are three means of ascertaining the 'Deity' of a particular Sacrifice.- (1) Nominal Affixes-for instance, the term 'Agneya' is formed of the noun 'Agni' with the nominal affix 'dhak,' according to Pāṇini 4,2.24; so that Agni becomes indicated as the 'Deity' of the Agneya-Sacrifice; (see Mi. Sa. 10.4.25);-(2) the Dative End- ing; when it is said 'Agnaye yajati', 'Sacrifices to Agni', Agni is indicated as the 'Deity' of the Sacrifice. This latter is weaker in authority than the former, because the Deity, not being a per- sonal entity, cannot be the recipient of a gift' in the real sense of the term; this 'recipientship' being what is denoted by the Dative, the Dative can apply to the Deity only figuratively, while the exact signification of the nominal affix 'dhak' is 'Deityship', 'agnēya' being that of which Agni is the Deity,' and this is ap- plicable to Agni directly. ((3) Mantras-Some word or expression 
F. 43338 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
in the Mantras also serve to indicate the Deity; e.g., the Mantra 'Ketum kṛyvannakētavē, etc.' indicates Ketu as the Deity. 
This Modification-Uha-is of two kinds-(1) one that is directly laid down; for instance, when it is declared that at the Ectype, a certain corn has to be thumped once, and not as many times as may be necessary for the removal of the chaff, as is done at the Archetype; and the Mantro accompanying the thumping is also to be recited only once. (2) That which is inferred or pre- sumed; this latter is of three kinds-(a) The Modification of the Mantra; e.g., at the Agneya-Sacrifice, the substance offered is the Vrihi-corn, and the offering is made to Agni, and the Mantra used is-'Agnayê tvā juṣṭam nirvapāmi ... orīhīņām sumanasya- mānuḥ' (Vājasa-Sam. 1.13); this Agneya-Sacrifice is the Arche- type, of which the Saurya-Sacrifice is an Ectype; but at this latter the substance offered is the Virara corn: and the offerings are made to Surya; in view of these facts, certain Modifications in the accompanying Mantra appear to be called for; consequently, even though there is no Vedic Injunction laying down such modifica- tions of the Mantra, the necessary Injunction is inferred from the needs of the situation and the Mantra is used in the form- "Süryāya (instead of Agnaye) tvá justam nirvapāmi nīvā- rāṇām (instead of 'vrihiņām') sumanasyamānaḥ”—(Sūtra 9.3. 1- 2). (b) The second kind of Modification is that of the Saman; for instance, for the Vaishyastoma Sacrifice, the Kanvarathantara has been prescribed; while at the original Sacrifice as performed by Brāhmaṇas, of which the Vaishyastoma is the Ectype,-the Samans used are the Bṛhat and the Rathantara. The question then arises as to whether the Saman at the Vaishyastoma is to be sung in the manner of both the Samans of the Archetype or of one of these only. In the answer to this there is a marked difference between Shabara and Kumārila: According to Shabara, (Trs., p. 1543) it has to be sung in the manner of both,-there being an option only with regard to such details of singing in which the Brhat is directly incompatible with the Rathantara: as for in- stance, while the Bṛhat is sung loudly, the Rathantara is sung not-loudly;-according to Kumārila (Ţupṭīkā) on the other hand, there is option in regard to all the details of singing; that is to say, when singing the Kanvarathantara at the Vaishyastoma, one should sing either wholly like Bṛhat, or wholly like Rathantara, 
• 
CHAPTER XXVIII: MODIFICATION 
339 
(Su. 9.2.48). (c) The third kind of Modification is that of the Embellishment; for the Fajapēya-Sacrifice the Nivara-corn has been prescribed; while at its Archetype, the corn used is the Vrihi, in connection with which, washing, thumping, and other Em- bellishments have been prescribed. Though no such Embellish- ments have been directly prescribed for the Nivara-corn, yet they have to be done in connection with this latter also; for the simple reason that without such Embellishments, the corn would not be fit for use at Sacrifices. (Su. 9.2.40.) 
The Modification of Mantra again is of various kinds. The Mīmāmsā-bālaprakāsha (p. 131, et. seq.) has noted the following ten kinds :-(1) Alteration of the Basic Noun ;-'Agnaye' changed into 'Sūryāya' (see above);—(2) Alteration of Gender; the Mantra 'Vasvyasi rudrūsi, etc.' (Feminine) is addressed to the Heifer; and it is changed into 'Vasvasi rudrosi' (Masculine) when addressed to the Calf;-(3) Alteration of Number: the Mantra Chhagasya vapayā, etc.' is changed into 'Chhāgānām rapaya, etc.' (Plural) at the Prajapatya-Sacrifice, where there are several goats concern- ed; (4) Alteration of the Basic Noun and Gender; e.g., 'Agnaye justam' is changed into Adityai juṣṭam':-(5) Alteration of Basic Noun and Number: e.g., ‘Agnayê juṣṭam' is changed into Vishvēbhyo devebhyo justam';-(6) Alteration of Number and Gender; 'Prūsmai agnim, etc.' changed into 'Prābhyah agnim'; (not so according to Shabara, see Trs., p. 1572)-(7) Alteration of the Basic Noun, Gender and Number: for the consecration of the water used for the washing of the corn, We have the Mantra 'Apodeviḥ shuddhaḥ sthaḥ', where the words 'Apodeviḥ, etc.' 
etc.' are Feminine-Plural; this same Mantra when used for the consecra- tion of Clarified Butter, is read as 'Ghṛtadera-shuddhamasi'; (8) Alteration in the form of repeating the whole of the original, twice over; e.g., in the cutting of the Skin, the Mantra used begins with 'Ekadha', when there is only one skin; when there are two skins concerned, the Mantra begins as 'Ekadhe-Ekadhe' (Sū. 9.3. 29-31); (9) Alteration of the word with the Nominal Affix; e.g., the Mantra-Miträvaruṇau tvā uttarataḥ, etc.' (Vājasa-Sam. 2.3) is changed into 'Mitrāvaruņau tvā purastāt, etc'; (10) Alteration of Indeclinables; e.g., the Mantra-‘Agnim grhṇāmi shvo yajñāya ramatam' is changed into adya yajñāya, etc.', where for 'sheah' in the original, we have 'adya' in the Modification. 
C 
340 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
In this connection, it has to be noted that the Mantra in its modified form is not regarded as 'Mantra' in the strict sense of the term; even though it serves the purpose of a Mantra, it is not a Mantra, it is only an auxiliary to the Mantra; the reason for this lies in the fact that the learned do not regard the modified Mantra as Mantra', and it is entirely upon the usage of the learned that it depends whether or not a certain text is to be regarded as 'Mantra'. (Sü. 2.1.34; Bṛhati. MS., 50B).-(See above.) 
.. 
CHAPTER XXIX 
BADHA-EXCLUSION 
We have seen that under the General Law-that The Eetype should be performed in the manner of the Archetype'-certain acces- sory details are 'transferred' to the Ectype from the Archetype;— also that in certain cases, there is 'modification', at the Ectype, of details 'transferred' to it from the Archetype; now we proceed a step further and consider those cases where there is complete 'Exclusion' (Suspension or Anulment) at the Ectype of the details which are indicated as to be 'transferred' from the Archetype to the Ectype. 
The General Principle on this subject of Exclusion has been discussed under Sutras 10.1. 1-3. (Bhasya, Trs., p. 1635 et. seq.). The question has been put in the Bhagya thus-When the details of the Archetype are indicated as to be transferred' to the Eetype,- by virtue of the General Law that 'the Ectype is to be performed in the manner of the Archetype',-are all the details of the Archetype to be adopted at the Ectype? or is there anything that may be excluded? 
On this question, the Prima Facie View is as follows:-“ In as much as the entire procedure-of the Archetype-is transferred to the other Context-i.c., to the Ectype,-without any reservation, -it follows that all the details should be adopted." (Su. 10.1.1)". 
The Established Conclusion however is that-In reality, it is only when the need is there that the Mantra, the Embellishment or the Substance is to be employed. (Su. 10.1.2). As a matter of fact, it is not right that all the Details of the Archetype should be adopted at the Eetype; in some cases, the Mantra or the Em- bellishment or the Substance-used at the Archetype-becomes excluded from the Eetype, when its need has ceased. Every one of these Details is used only when there is need for it. There is no Vedic text laying down the use of anything that is not needed. In fact, the Ectype is not syntactically related to the Archetype at all; all that the text enjoining the Ectype means is that 'the desired result should be accomplished by means of the Ectype'; and the manner of this accomplishment is indicated by the General 
341 
342 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSÄ IN ITS SOURCES 
Law in the same manner in which it is accomplished by the Archetype'; and the effect of this is that those details that are adopted at the Archetype for the fulfilling of a certain need be- come excluded from the Ectype, if there is no need for them at the latter; hence the conclusion is that the General law does not indicate the employment at the Ectype of those details of the Archetype of which the need has ceased. For example, (a) at the Archetype, the Kusha-grass has got to be lopped with special Mantras; but in connection with the Ectype, it is said that 'the grass used should be that which has fallen off by itself'; hence there is no need for the adopting of the grass lopped with special Mantras. (Bhasya. Trs., pp. 1636-1637.) (b) In connection with the Ectype, it is enjoined that the Charu-offering is to consist of a Hundred Gold Pieces'; of this special kind of ‘Charu' there can be no 'threshing' which has been enjoined in connection with the 'Charu-offering' of Rice, offered at the Archetype; this threshing therefore, not being needed in the case of the gold pieces becomēs excluded from the Ectype. (Bhāṣya, Trs., p. 1638.) (c) Simi- larly at the Charu-offering to Fishrēdēvas, the Invocation to Visnu becomes excluded, as there is no need for it. (Bhā., Trs., p. 1639.) 
In regard to case (b) above, that of the offering consisting of gold-pieces, there is a counter-exception; we have seen above that the 'threshing' has become excluded from it; now it would seem that the 'Cooking' also, that is done at the Archetype, to the grain-offering, should be excluded from the gold-pieces; as there is no need for cooking in their case. But there is a direct Injune- tion laying down the 'cooking' of the gold-pieces 'in Clarified Butter'; and by virtue of this Injunction, it has to be done,- though not for the purpose for which it is done at the Archetype. (Su. 10.2. 1-2, Bha., Trs., p. 1076.) 
There are two kinds of this Exclusion (Badha)-(See Mimum- sābālaprakasha, p. 131 et. seq.) (1) Prāpta-badha (or Prameyā- pahāra as called by Parthasarathi Mishra)-is the 'Exclusion' of a Modification indicated by 
indicated by Transference';-this Exclusion applies to the Modification which is, by its very nature, inadmis- sible;-(2) Aprūptabādha (called Mülochecheda by Parthasarathi Mishra), is the 'Exclusion' of a Modification not indicated by any of the valid forms of Transference', which is therefore not 
CHAPTER XXIX: EXCLUSION 
343 
admissible. The Prupta-badha again has been divided into two kinds (a) 'Exclusion', through the Six Means of Right Cogni- tion, Sense-perception and the rest, and (6) Exclusion' on the strength of 'Scripture'. Of this latter again, there are several subdivisions. For instance-(a) What has been laid down as to be done under normal conditions is excluded by what has been laid down as to be done under special circumstances of the case; for instance, Fifteen Sămidhēni verses have been laid down as to be recited at the Darsha-Sacrifice, and it is also laid down that if the Sacrificer happens to be a Vaishya, the number of Samidhĕni- verses to be recited should be Seventeen; accordingly under the latter circumstances, serenteen are recited. (b) What has been enjoined as merely helping in the accomplishment of the Sacri- ficial act is 'excluded' in favour of what has been enjoined as accomplishing a result desired by the Sacrificer; e.g., in regard to the same Samidheni verses, it has been laid down that, in the event of the Sacrificer being desirous of acquiring 'fame' or 'honour', the number of verses should be twenty-one; this number thus excludes the fifteen and seventeen mentioned above. (c) That which has gone before becomes 'excluded' by what comes after it; e.g., in connection with the going of the Priests out of Havirdhana, it is laid down that-'If the Udgatṛ-Priest breaks the line, the Sacrifice should be finished without Fees; if the Pratiharty breaks it, the Sacrificer should give away all his belongings';-now if it so happens that the line is broken by both these Priests, the Sacrificer has to give away 'all his belongings.'-the latter rule 'excluding the former. (d) What serves no useful purpose becomes 'excluded'; e.g., the process laid down for the removal of chaff from the grain to be offered becomes excluded at the Ectype when the offering consists of 'gold-pieces'. (See above). (e) Some details that are 'transferable' from the Archetype to the Ectype under the General Law, are 'excluded' by Direct Assertion in the Veda itself prohibiting such details; e.g., the Appointment of the Hoty-Priest is 'excluded' from the Paitri-Sacrifice. (f) A 'trans- ferable' Substance becomes 'excluded' by the Direct Injunction of another Substance for the same purpose; e.g., at the Shyena- Sacrifice, the Kusha is 'excluded' by Reeds; and though the Fee prescribed at the Archetypal Agnyadhana is the Cow, it becomes 'excluded' from the Eetypal Agnyādhānas by the old cart duly repaired', which is, the fee specially prescribed for the latter. 
344 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
(Su. 10.3. 30-33.) (g) What is laid down by the General Rule is 'excluded' by the Special Rule; e.g., in connection with the Varuṇapraghasa, there is a Substance specially prescribed, in the shape of the Niskāsa (the whey, left after the removal of the curdled pieces of milk); and this 'excludes' the Cake which would come into the Tarunapraghasa by the General Law regarding the Eetype being performed in the manner of the Archetype. (Su. 7.3.16.) (b) The Useless is 'excluded' by the Useful; e.g., among the Mantras laid down as to be recited as 'Nigadas',—i.e., words addressed to others, there are some Yajus texts also-with regard to the reciting of the Yajus-terts it is laid down that it should be done not-loudly-Silently-now if, the words meant to be ad- dressed to others were recited Silently, they would entirely fail in their purpose; for this reason, the 'slient' 'reciting of the Yajuş becomes, in this case, 'excluded' by the 'loud reciting', which would serve a useful purpose when heard by the other person to whom it is addressed. (i) The Smaller is 'excluded' by the Larger; e.g., in connection with the Panchadasharātra- Sacrifice, when we come to consider the matter of 'names', we find that the single name 'Agnistut',-which would indicate the reciting of the Agnėyi Subrahmanya verse-is 'excluded' in favour of the several names Jyotis' and the rest, by virtue of which the Aindri Subrahmanya is recited. () That which has room for itself elsewhere becomes 'excluded' by that which, if not adopted on the occasion in question, would have no place anywhere else; e.g,, with reference to the recitation preceeding the Agnīṣomiya offering, it is laid down that it is to be done silently; but with regard to the Dikṣaniya Isti, a distinct accent has been prescribed, showing that the Mantras have to be recited loudly enough to allow of the accentuation being marked-now as regards this latter recitation, the Silent method is 'excluded' in favour of the louder, in view of the fact that the Silent method, if dropped at the Dikṣaṇiyā, could still be adopted at the recitations on other occasions, while the particular accent, if dropped at the Dikṣaniya Recitation, could not be adopted at any other recitation; so that it would be dropped entirely; which cannot be permitted in regard to anything that has been directly enjoined in the Veda. 
In all these cases we had the 'Exclusion' of details the adop- tion of which was indicated by some valid Means of Knowledge. There is 'Exclusion' also of such things as do not have their adoption 
CHAPTER XXIX: EXCLUSION 
indicatd by any valid means. 
345 
As there can be no limit to such things, the number of 'Exclusions' of this kind cannot be fixed. Shankara-Bhaṭṭa enumerates and exemplifies no less than 556 'Exclusions' of this class. (See Mimāmsābālaprakasha, pp. 134- 137.) 
There are several instances, where there is 'Exclusion', not of all the details transferable from the Archetype, but of only a por- tion of these. For instance, for the baking of the Cake dedicated to Agni, eight Pans have been prescribed, in connection with the Agneya-Sacrifice;-in connection with its Ectype, the offering to Dyāvāpṛthvi, only one Pan is prescribed; hence when transfering the Pan from the Agnya to the Ectypal offering, only one of the eight pans shall be brought in,-and that too only the first,-and the remaining seven shall be 'excluded'. (Sū. 10-5.1-3.) 
In some cases of Transference the order of the details trans- ferred is altered; for instance, at the Archetypal Jyotistoma- Sacrifice, there are certain Cups dedicated to certain Deities;- when these are 'transferred' to the Ectype, the order in which they were held at the Archetype,-when the cup dedicated to Indra came first,-is changed and the cup held first is that dedicated to Shukra; and this in accordance with the Direct Injunction to that effect. (Su. 10.5. 67-69.). This change of order has been called 'Pratikarṣa'. 
In some cases the Details 'transferred' from the Archetype are not sufficient for the Ectype; e.g., at the Archetype only fifteen Samans are sung, while for the Ectype, twenty-one have been pres- cribed; in this case the remaining Sia Sāmans have to be added over and above the fifteen transferred from the Archetype; and the number twenty-one is not to be made up by repeating twice Sia out of the same fifteen Samans. (Su. 10.5. 15-25.) Simi- larly, the Archetypal Jyotistoma is performed by only one Sacri- ficer; but the Ectypal Sattra must have seventeen Sacrificers, according to a Direct Injunction to that effect. (Su. 10.6. 45-50.) 
The Subject of Badha, 'Exclusion', leads on to that of its antithesis, Samuchchaya, 'Inclusion', or 'Combination'; by virtue of which there is 'Combination' of what is prescribed for the Ectype specifically with what is 'transferred' to it from the Archetype. For instance, in connection with the Nakṣatreşti, certain addi- tional Libations have been prescribed as to be poured after the 
F. 44 
346 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
principal offerings,-these libations being offered to the Krittikās, to Amba and to Dula;-at the Archetype however, after the prin- cipal offerings, come the Narista-homas; these Narista-homas are transferable to the Nakṣatrēști; and in this case there is no 'exclu- sion' from the Nakṣatreşti, of either the before-mentioned liba- tions to the Krittikās, etc., or of the Narista-homas; both sets of offerings are 'combined' and offered; and the reason for this non- exclusion lies in the fact that these offerings serve transcendental purposes and there can be no justification for abandoning either of them. 
MEANING OF THE NEGATIVE TERM 
As 'Exclusion',-which is practically the same as 'Prohibition' -is generally expressed by the Negative Term, Jaimini has dis- cussed the signification of the Negative Term under Sú. 10.8.1. 
et. seq. 
(1) In most cases, we find 'Exclusion' or 'Prohibition' relat- ing to such details as are indicated as to be transferable to the Ectype from the Archetype, under the General Law relating to the Archetype and the Ectype; and (2) in some cases it is found to relate to details that have been enjoined in a general way with- out reference to any particular Sacrifice. 
(1) An instance of 'Exclusion' or 'Prohibitiin' of a Detail in- dicated as transferable to the Ectype from the Archetype, under the General Law, we have the case of the Appointment of the Priests, this has been laid down in connection with the Archetype, and as such is transferable to the Ectype; but in regard to the Ectype it has been directly prohibited by a Vedic text;-this prohibition is regarded as modifying, in regard to the Ectype, the Archetypal Injunction and its indications to this extent that it is taken to mean that 'at the Ectype one should employ all the details of the Archetype, with the Exception of the Appointment of Priests'. Thus in this case, the Prohibition signifies Exception. (Su. 10.8. 1-4.) 
(2) In a case where there are two mutually contradictory as- sertions in two Vedic texts themselves,-e.g., one text says 'the Sodashin vessel should be held at the Atiratra', and another to the effect that 'the Sodashin vessel should not be held at the Atirātra', 
CHAPTER XXIX: EXCLUSION 
347 
-the Negative Term in the latter text does not signify Exception, as it negatives the previous declaration entirely; hence in this case, the Prohibition expressed by the Negative Term modifies the Archetypal Injunction and its indications to this extent that the particular detail of Holding the Vessel-is made a matter of option. (Sū. 6. 10.6.) 
. 
In some cases, the Negative Term signifies only the praise of something other than what is negatived. E.g., in connection with the Agnihotra, we have a Vedic text to the effect that-'One should offer the Wild-Sesamum', and this ends with the words 'the wild sesamum is no offering at all'; the first part of the text lays down the Wild Sesamum as something to be offered, while the second part speaks of the same as not-to-be-offered; with a view to recon- cile these two contradictory statements, the negative assertion in the second part of the text has been taken to mean that-'the offer- ing, of milk at the Agnihotra is so praiseworthy that even such an excellent substance as the Wild Sesamum may not be offered in its place'; in this case, the negation, i.e., exclusion, prohibition-of the Wild Sesamum signifies the praise of Milk. (Su. 10.8.7.) 
i 
(4) In some cases, the Negative Term signifies only partial 'Exclusion'. E.g., in connection with the Jyotistoma we have the text-"The man who has been initiated for the Sacrifice should not make gifts or offer libations',-where certain acts are forbidden for the Initiated Sacrificer;-these same acts are also found to be en- joined by another text as what should be done, for the purpose of securing certain desirable results;-these same acts are also 'trans- ferable' to the Agnihotra, as helping the accomplishment of the Sacrifice. The question arises as to where these two sets of the acts are meant to be negatived by the said Prohibition-(a) at the Jyotiṣṭoma itself, where it is to be performed for obtaining certain results, or (b) at the Agnihotra where it accomplishes the Sacrifice, or (c) at both of these? The Established Conclusion is that the acts are not prohibited in connection with both, they are prohi- bited only in connection with the case where they are performed with a view to desirable results; and the reason for this conclusion. lies in the fact that the text containing the Negation or Prohibi- tion in question follows clearly upon the Injunction of the Acts as leading to certain desirable results for the performer. (Sú. 10.8. 12-15.)CHAPTER XXX 
'TANTRA 
CENTRALISATION 
We have dealt with 'Exclusion' and 'Inclusion', of Details; these enable us to determine the extent and the scope of the Ectypal Sacrifice. This leads us to consider the means of determining the extent and scope of the entire Sacrifices-specially the com- posite ones which consist of a Primary and a number of Subsi- diary Sacrifices. This subject lends itself to a twofold division— (a) There are certain Subsidiaries which, if performed once, effec- tually help, by that single performance, more than one Act; this help accorded by a single performance of the Subsidiary to seve- ral Primaries has been called 'Tantra' (Centralisation, Collectiva- tion); (b) there are, on the other hand, some Subsidiaries which have to be repeated in connection with each Primary to which they are related; this repetition of the Subsidiary with each Primary has been called 'Avāpa' (De-centralisation, Distribution). 
As a preliminary to the consideration of this question of 'Centralisation' and 'Decentralisation', it is necessary to consider whether in the case of a composite Sacrificial performance, consist- ing of a number of minor Sacrifices, the specified result follows from all collectively or from each severally. There are similar questions that arise in regard to all composite Sacrifices. (Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 2080-2081.) 
The Established Conclusion on this question is that the result follows from all the Sacrifices collectively. 
This is the case with the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa for instance, which is a composite Sacrifice, consisting of six Sacrifices-the Agneya and the rest; and 'Heaven' has been declared to be the Result followng from them. The question is-Does this result proceed from all the six Sacrifices in common, collectively? Or from each of them severally? The Established Conclusion on this question is that-these Sacrifices, though made up of several Acts, 
348 
name. 
CHAPTER XXX: CENTRALISATION 
349 
should be regarded as one Act (Composite)—because they are relat- ed to a single purpose and because they are called by a single (Su. 11.1.1.) That is to say, though the Agneya and the other components of the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa are distinct from each other, they should be regarded as 'one act', because they are all related to the same Result, collectively; and those Sacrifices which lead to the same single Result must be 'one act'. That these acts are related to the Result collectively follows from the fact that they are called by a single name, which name signifies all the com- ponent acts collectively, and it is through this name that the text has connected the Acts with the particular Result. (Bhāṣya, Trs., pp. 2082-2083.) 
The use of this dsicussion lies in the fact that, if the Result followed from all the component Sacrifices collectively, then the Subsidiary Details should have to be performed only once,--not with each of the component Sacrifices; whereas if the Result followed from each of the component Sacrifices severally, then the Subsidiary details should have to be performtd with each one of these components. Thus then, in the former case, there would be Tantra, 'Centralisation', and in the latter case Avapa, 'Decentral- isation'. 
The same question arises in regard to the Subsidiaries also:- Do all the prescribed Subsidiaries help their Primary collectively? Or does each Subsidiary accord its help independently of the rest? The Established Conclusion here also is that it is collectively that the Subsidiaries help the Primary; so that here also we have Tantra, 'Centralisation' (Sū. 11.1. 5—19). 
A typical instance is provided by the Prayājus which are Sub- sidiary to the Darsha-Purnamasa; and the conclusion is that these Prayājas have to be performed only once, and thereby they help the whole of the composite Darsha-Purnamasa. (Su. 11.1. 29-37.) 
Another general question dealt with in this connection is in regard to the Prospective Sacrifices, i.e., Sacrifices performed with a view to a definite result. Should these be performed only once? Or should they be repeated? The Established Conclusion on this question is that such Sacrifices may be repeated as often as one may have the desire for the particular result. (Su. 11.1. 20-25.) In the case of acts with visible results, they have to be repeated as 
350 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
often as.it may be necessary for the obtaining of that result; e.g., the Threshing of the Corn has to be repeated until the removal of the chaff has been accomplished. (Su. 11.1.27.) But these same acts, if performed with a view to unseen results, should be per- formed only once. (Sū. 11.1.28.) 
The following are some other typical instances of Tantra. (a) Bearing upon the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa Sacrifice, we have a number of Injunctions laying down details in connection with them such as the Darsha-Purnamasa should be performed upon level ground', 'the Pūrṇamāsa should be performed on the Full-Moon day', 'there should be four Priests at it', and so forth. From these Injunctions it would seem that the entire Darsha-Purṇamāsa should be performed on level ground, on the Full-Moon day and so forth, the whole Sacrifice being repeated at each place and time mentioned. But the Established Conclusion on this point is that the entire Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa is to be performed once only, and that this one performance should be done at the place and time laid down in the text; and the reason for this lies in the fact that the numerous acts composing the Darsha-Purṇamāsa are to bring about their Result collectively, as combining to make up the single performance of the Sacrifice as a whole. (Su. 11.2. 1-2.) (6) All the Subsidiary Sacrifices entering into a Primary Sacrifice should similarly be performed only once at the same time and place as that Primary. (Su. 11.2. 3-10.) (e) A third instance of Tantra is provided by the Agnyadhāna, Fire-Installation,— which is done only once in life and is used at the subsequent Sacrifices. (Su. 11.3.2.) 
This same Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa supplies an instance of Avapa, 'Decentralisation', also:-This Sacrifice consists of two sets of Sacrifices one called 'Darsha' and the other 'Pūrṇamāsa'; though the Subsidiaries prescribed for each set are nearly the same, yet they have to be repeated with each of the two sets; and the reason for this lies in the fact that, though the two sets together make up a single Saceifice, leading to a single Result,-yet, in asmuch as the two sets are performed on two different days-fifteen days apart- the Subsidiaries performed with one set would be performed on the day on which that set is performed; and thus they would not be performed on the day prescribed for the second set, which latter would, therefore, be left incomplete, bereft of the prescribed Sub- 
CHAPTER XXX: CENTRALISATION 
351 
sidiaries. In such cases therefore, the Subsidiaries have to be repeated. (Su. 11.2. 11-17.) 
There are however certain Subsidiaries which, by their very nature, and also by virtue of Direct Injunctions,-cannot be per- formed on the same day as their Primary; for instance, the Erect- ing of the Altar has been enjoined as to be done on the day preceding the performance of the Darsha; and hence this Erection cannot be done on the same day as the Darsha Sacrifice itself. (Sū. 11.3.1.) 
C 
CHAPTER XXXI 
(A) PRASANGA -EXTENDED APPLICATION 
'Tantra' has been defined as consisting in the single perform- ance of a Subsidisry benefiting more than one Primary,-that single performance being enjoined and intended by the Sacrificer to help more than one Primary Act. In certain cases, the scope of this 'tantra' is further extended, and the single performance of a Subsidiary,-even though prescribed and intended to help one Primary, is accepted as helping another Primary also, when this latter is performed by the same man and at the same time and place as the former Primary. This is called 'Prasanga', Extended Application. For instance, in connection with the Agniṣomiya Animal-Sacrifice, there is an offering of Meat-Cake, laid down in the text,-'Having offered the omentum of the animal sacrificed to Agni-Soma, one should offer the Meat- cake, dedicated to Agni-Soma'. The question in regard to this is -Should the Subsidiaries-i.e., the Prayājas-which have been prescribed for the Agniṣomiya Sacrifice, be performed separately for the Meat-cake Offering? Or is this Meat-cake offering to be re- garded as having received the requisite help from those Subsidiaries as performed in connection with the Agnişomiya Animal-Sacrifice, and there is no need for a separate performance of these? The Established Conclusion on this question is that the Meat-cake-offering is accomplished through the Subsidiaries performed during the Procedure of the Animal-Sacrifice; because it has been enjoined in the middle of the Process. (Su. 12.1.3.) That is, as a matter of fact, the Cake-offering has been laid down in the middle of the Procedure of the Anmal-Sacrifice; by virtue of which the help rendered by the Subsidiaries operates both ways-i.e., it helps the Animal-Sacrifice as well as the Cake-offering; the Subsidiaries performed in connection with the Animal-Sacrifice are in proxi- mity to the Cake-offering also; and by virtue of this proximity, they render help to this latter offering also; like the lamp lighted in the house illumining the road also. (Bhāṣya, 
(Bhasya, Trs., p. 2255.) Even though we have no such Injunction as that 'What is done for the Animal-Sacrifice helps the Cake-offering also', yet the circum- 
352 
CHAPTER XXXI: EXTENDED APPLICATION 
353 
stances brought into existence by the performance of the Subsi- diaries with the intention of helping one act, could not cease to exist and withdraw their help from another Act also, which latter might happen to be performed at that same time and place and by the same Performer. (Sü. 12.1. 1-6.) 
Similarly, when one has erected the Sacrificial Altar in con- nection with the Agnistoma-Sacrifice,-if he wishes to perform an Isti also, after that Agnistoma, he need not erect another Altar for the latter; the same Altar can serve for both Sacrifices. (Su. 12.2. 8-9.) 
There are certain exceptions to this also For instance, the Arambhaniya Isti has been enjoined as to be performed at the commencement of the first Darsha-Purnamasa that one undertakes to perform, as shown under 9.1. 34-35; though this Isti is meant to be only purificatory or preparatory in character,-tending to purify the Sacrificer and prepare him for the Sacrifice,-yet, in as- much as a single performance helps all the Sacrifices performed by the man in course of the Darsha-Purnamasa, it has to be repeated along with each of the Ectypes that the man performs; and the reason for this lies in the fact that the qualification 'life-long' does not pertain to the Primary Sacrifice, but to the performer of each Sacrifice (as shown under 2.4.1), and hence there is no 'Extended Application' of the Arambhaṇīyā Iṣṭi in this case (12.2. 19——21). 
(B) VIKALPA OPTION 
We now proceed to consider the subject of 'Option', 'Vikalpa', which may be regarded as an anithesis to Sammuchehayo, 'Combi- nation' or 'Inclusion', dealt with by the Sutra under Discourse 9. (See above). In cases of Inclusion', there is performance of several Subsidiaries together, while in cases of 'Option', only one of the several possible Subsidiaries can be performed; and the choice in the matter lies with the Sacrificer. 
Before taking up the particular instances of Option, a few general observations on the subject appear to be called for. As a rule, Option is not permissible except under strict necessity; be- cause its acceptance gives rise to eight undesirable contingencies. For instance, there is the typical instance of Option between Yava and I'rihi, both of which are optional alternatives;-accepting 
F. 45 
354 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
this option, (1) if we use Trihi, and not use Yara, we reject the authority of the Vedic text enjoining the use of Yava,-(2) we assume the untrustworthy character of this text,-(3) if, on the other hand, we use lava, and not use Triki, we reject the author- ity of the text prescribing Frihi, and (4) assume the untrustworthy character of this text; (5) in this latter case again, we accept the authority of the Yara-tert which we had rejected before, (6) we thereby reject the previously-assumed untrutworthiness of the Yara-text; (7) in using the Irihi again, we accept the authority of the 'rihi-tert we had rejected before, and (8) we also reject the previously-assumed untrustworthiness of that text. 
It may be noted that these objections apply only to the case of those options which are not-restricted, that is, those where the choice is left to the will of the Agent; it does not apply to those cases where the option is restricted, ryavasthita, of ze szfaûì âu: -says Devanatha Tḥakkura in his Adhikaranakanmudi (p. 1).. 
Options have been grouped primarily under three heads: (Vide Mīmāmsābālaprakāsha, p. 152–65) (A) Indicated by Reason, (B) Indicated by Direct Declaration, (C) Dependent upon the wish of the Agent. 
(A) Of Option indicated by Reason, there are eight sub-divi- sions:-(1) Option between two kinds', e.g., between the kind of corn, called 'Trihi' and that called 'Yava';-(2) between two particular individual things, e.g., at the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa, for the Agnisomiya-offering, the Cake offered may be the one baked either on eleven or twelve pans, as laid down in the texts of two different Vedic Rescensions (lide 2. 4. 8-32);-(2) between two Qualities; e.g., between the Black and the Red colours of the Goat for the Agnisomāya-offering: (4) between two Acts; e.g., at the Jyotistoma, when the Priests go out of the Havirdhana, forming themselves into a line, if the line happens to be broken by one Priest, one set of Expiatory Rites is to be performed,-if by an- other Priest, then another set,-if both should happen to break the line simultaneously, then there is Option between the two sets of Expiatory Rites, (See Su. 6. 5. 51-53);-(5) Between the using of one kind of things and the total abandoning of it; e.g., for the Vājasanēyins, it has been laid down that they may or may not recite the Nakṣatra-Mantra: so that the Recitation of the kind of Mantra called 'Nakṣatra-Mantra' may be done or may be entirely omittted; 
CHAPTER XXXI: EXTENDED APPLICATION 
355 
-(6) Between the using and abandoning of a particular Individual thing; e.g., the particular Mantra called 'Sambhara' may be re- cited or entirely omitted; (7) Between the adopting and abandoning of a Quality; e.g., for the Altar of the Darsha-Sacrifice, a parti- cular size has been prescribed, and at the same time there is a declaration to the effect that 'there need be no exact measurement for the Altar'; hence the specially-prescribed Size may or may not be adopted; (8) Between the performing and abandoning of an Act; e.g., the Holding of the Sodashin vessel at the Atiratra may or may not be done. 
All these eight kinds of Option again may be either Kratvartha, -helping the fulfilment of the Sacrifice-or Puruşartha, accom- plishing something desirable for the Agent. All the instances cited above belong to the former class; i.e., they are all Kratrartha Options. At the Darsha-Purnamasa Sacrifice, the water is fetched in j vessel which has a handle four inches long and a cavity eight inches deep and about nine inches in diameter; if the Sacrificer is desirous of securing Brahmic-Glory, the vessel should, according to one text, be made of Wood, while, according to another text, of Bell-metal; and this gives rise to option. There are Eleven kinds of this Puruşārtha option. 
All these nineteen options are Indicated by Reason. 
(B) Of Option Indicated by Direct Declaration also there are nineteen kinds. As an example of one of these, we have the Option indicated by the Vedic text-'One who desires to Sacrifice with corns, or with animals, or Soma should perform the Sacrifice on the Moonless day or on the Full-Moon day'; where we have the option regarding the material substances, as also regarding time. In Smrti also we have the text to the effect that the Pitys remain satisfied for a month, with offerings of Sesamum or Barley': where we have an option between the two substances Sesamum and Barley. 
(C) Of the third kind of Option-that dependent on the wish of the Agent,also, there are nineteen kinds. As an example of this, we have the followig:-In connection with the Ashvamedha, it has been laid down that 'A Brahmana is to be sacrificed to Brahma; the Brahmana-thus Sacrificed may be one belonging to the Kaundinya or to any other Gotra; this depends entirely on the wish of the Sacrificer. 
356 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
There is another division of Options into two classes— (a) Vyavasthita, 'Restricted',-where, among the alternatives, there is a limit or restriction, and (b) Avyavasthita, ‘Unrestricted', -where there is no such restriction or limit. Each of these again is Indicated by Reason Or Indicated by Direct Declaration. Examples of this latter class-i.e., Restricted Option Indicated by Direct Declaration, we have in the cases already cited. 
cited. As an example of the Restricted Option Indicated by Reason, we have one from the Smptis, discussed by Kumarila (in the Smṛti-půda of the Tantracārtika); it has been laid down that-The Brahmana should devote twelve years of his life to the study of each of the Vedas, or us many years may be necessary'-on the face of it, this appears to indicate an unrestricted Option, to be deter- mined entirely by the wish of the Student whether he will complete the entire course of the study of the four Vedas in 48 years or in 4 only; but by means of Reasoning, it has been shown by Kumārila that here we have the Option of the Restricted kind,-the meaning of the text being that if the Student is not going to take to the life of the householder, he should devote 48 years to Vedic study,- if however he is going to enter that life, then he should devote only 5 years to each Veda and complete the course in 20 years; but in case he is not able, under his peculiar circumstances, to devote more than 2 or 3 years to each Veda, he should adopt this last course, and so on. (See Tantravārtika, p. 112.) 
The Restriction of Options indicated by Direct Declaration is of seven kinds :-(1) Restriction regarding Place; e.g., the Conse- cration of Fire having been laid down as to be performed during Spring, the question arises as to which of the two methods of count- ing the seasons is to be adopted; Seasons are as a rule calculated by the lunar month, and the lunar month has been taken by some people to begin with the Moonless Day, and by others, with the Full-Moon day. The idea derived from all this would be that there is no restriction regarding the calculating of the month, and hence of the Seasons; but the requisite Restriction is provided by another text in the Trikāṇḍmaṇḍana, which asserts that "The system of the counting of the month as commencing with the Dark Fortnight is not accepted in countries lying to the South of the Vindhya Hills'; so here we have the Option restricted to Place. (2) Restriction in regard to Time; e.g., in regard to the reciting of the Vortraghi and the Vrdhanrati Mantras at the 
• 
CHAPTER XXXI: EXTENDED APPLICATION 
357 
Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa, there being an uncertainty as to which of the two sets is to be recited on the Moonless and which on the Full-Moon day, We have the restrictive rule to the effect that the Värtraghni are to be recited on the Full- Moon day and the Irdhanvati on the Moonless day'; so here the Option becomes restricted in regard to Time.-(3) Then there is restriction in regard to the Agent also; e.g., at the Darsha- Purnamasa, a Mantra is to be recited by the sacrificer, and in this connection three Mantras have been mentioned (1) ‘Agnē vratapatë', (2) Vayo vratapate' and (3) Aditya vratapate';-from which it would seem as if any Sacrificer may recite any one of these three Mantras; but there is the distinct rule to the effect that-The first of the three Mantras is to be recited by the Brahmana, the second by the Kṣattriyo and the third by the Vaishya, Sacrificer'. (4) There is Restriction also in regard to Action itself; e.g., in connection with the Farupapraghasa-Sacrifice, two Viharas (Place for keeping the offering-materials) have been prescribed, one to the North and another to the South;-and the impression being that any one of the performers might deposit anything on any one. of the Viharas, the Option becomes restricted by the further rule that the Adhraryu-priest is to keep eight of the articles on the Northern one and the Pratiprasthäty-priest is to keep the Maruti on the Southern One'. (5) There is Restriction also with regard to the Result: e.g., with regard to the several Optional Nidhanas (additional syllables added to the text of the Saman, by the exe- gencies of the music) to be adopted at the Jyotisto ma-Sacrifice, there is a rule laying down that-'When the Sacrificer desires rain, the Nidhana to be used is Hig,-when he desires food, it is to be Ürg, and when he desires Hearen, it is to be '; hence we have Restriction of the Option through the Result.-(6) There is Res triction also in regard to the Occasion or Contingent Circumstances; e.g., there is the rule-'In the case of the death of a Sapinda the period of impurity is to be ten days,-or till after the day of Bone- picking, or three days,-or one day':-here we have a number of Options which would be very confusing; but the wide Option has been restricted by another rule, which says-When the dead Sapinda is one whose Upanayana had been performed, the period shall be ten days; if his Tonsure had been performed, and not the Upanayana, then only four days... one day being the period in the case of the dead child having only just cut its teeth'.-358 
PŪRVA-MÏMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Lastly, there is the Conditiinal Restriction; e.g., Yava and Frihi are both enjoined as approved alternative grains to be used as offering materials; and this option has been restricted conditionally, by the rule that if one has commenced the preformance with F'rihi, he should proceed with the same to the end of the performance.' 
In regard to Option, the following facts are noteworthy: - 
In several cases, where there may appear to be Option, there is no real option at all je.g., in cases where several details have been laid down with regard to the same act,--each of these details being intended for a distinct purpose; in such cases every one of the details has to be adopted. (Su. 12.3.9.) But in cases where the details are for the same purpose, there is Option. (12.3. 10-14.) Similarly in regard to the several Expiatory Rites, if these are all prescribed in connection with the same delinquency, then there is to be Option (12. 3-15); but there is to be no Option when they are prescribed in connection with different deliquencies, in which latter case, all have to be performed. So with Mantras, it is only when several have been prescribed for the same purpose that we have Option, (12.3.28). But when, of such Mantras, one is found to be indicative of mere Recitation, another of Praise, and another of Invocation of Blessings,-every one of these has to be recited (12.4. 1-2). With regard to Gifts-where several numbers, 6, 12, etc., are prescribed, there is to be Option. (Sü. 12.4.9.) 
CHAPTER XXXII 
ACTS-SACRIFICES 
The Rules of 'nterpretation evolved in the Mimämsä-Sûtra, are of universal application,-useful wherever texts have to he interpreted. But they have suffered from the fact that the Commentators on the Sutras, from the earliest times it chose for their illustrations the texts bearing upon Sacrifices; the reasons for this are obvious. Hinduism is a religion of 'Sacrifices' in the highest sense of the term; as ordinarily understood however, the term has been understood to stand for the Sacrifices offered on the physical plane, represented by the offerings of material substances to 'Deities'. During the time the Commentators known to us lived, these Sacrifices formed the most important factor in the life of the Hindu. Naturally therefore the performance of these appeared to them to be the most familiar instances with which to illustrate the rules of interpretation. Circumstances have entirely changed, and 'Sacrifices' are now known merely by name; so that the illustrative examples have become all but unintelligible. A clear study of Sanskrit Literature will however reveal the fact that the rules have been drawn upon to elucidate knotty points in other branches of study and investigation also,-notably so in the domain of legal studies; and naturally so, because the 'Law' of the Hindus is based, directly or indirectly, on Scriptural texts (see above); and the interpretation of these texts had to be done through the Rules of Interpretation evolved in the Mimamsa-Sutra. We shall see later on how effectively these Rules have been utilised in the Literature of Hindu Law, as also in other branches of Literature. (See below.) 
In the meantime however, in order to make intelligible the dis- cussions and arguments carried on by the Mimamsaka in the earlier chapters of this work, it is necessary to provide a short account of these Sacrifices. 
is As we have seen above, the subject-matter of Mimām sā 'Dharma', and this term stands for what the man should do; but in common usage the term includes such acts as Yaga (Sacrifice proper), Homa (Pouring of Libations), Dana (Making Gifts), 
359 
360 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
Snana (Bathing), Dhyana (Meditation), Japa (Repeating Mantras) and so forth; but the principal forms of Dharma that form the subject-matter of Mimāmsã-Shastra are Yuga, Dana and Homa. The Bhāsya says 'The Primary act is in the form of Yaga (Sacri- ficing), Dāna (Giving), and Homa (Pouring into a receptacle)'— (Trs., p. 784). Every one of these acts consists in the offering of a certain thing to some one else; and the 'offering' common to all these has been defined as 'the setting aside of one's own ownership over the thing offered and the bringing about of the owner- ship of another person (the recipient of the gift)' (Bhasya, Trs., p. 785). (a) This offering becomes а Yaga, Sacri- fice, when it brings about the connection between a substance and a Deity' says the Sutra (4.2.27). In this case, there is a simple offering to the Deity;-(b) Homa also is the same, with the further element of 'Pouring'; so that Homa is an act of offering a sub- stance by pouring it into a receptacle. (Bha. Trs., p. 785). 
- 
The Tuptika remarks that the Bhasya has used the word 'aséchana', 'Pouring', because this element is present in most Homas, where the substance generally used is Clarified Butter or some such liquid substance; as a matter of fact however, there are several Homas at which Sesamum and other grains are offered; so that what differentiates the Homa from the Yaga is this, that in the Homa the substance is thrown into some suitable receptacle, as remarked by Tantraratna and Prakarṇapañchikā (P. 105). It is not necessary that this 'receptacle' of the offering should be Fire in order to make it loma', as has been asserted in the Bhaṭṭa- bhaskara, because in many Homas, the Substance is put into Water; e.g., at the Arabhṛtha-1ști performed on the completion of the Agnistoma. 
(c) In Dana, 'Gift', there is offering of the Substance followed by the actual bringing about of the ownership of the Recipient. (Bha. Trs. p. 785). The difference among Yaga, Homa and Dâna is as follows:-The relinquishment of one's own ownership over the offered substance is the factor common to all three; but in laga, the relinquishment of one's ownership is merely verbal, the sub- stance offered not being actually taken away by the Recipient (Deity); in Dāna, what is offered is actually taken away by the Recipient; and in Homa what is offered is thrown into some suit- able receptacle, Fire or Water. 
CHAPTER XXXII: ACTS-SACRIFICES 
361 
The 'Deity' to whom the Sacrifice is offered is, for the Mimamsaka, a purely hypothetical entity, posited for the sake of the Sacrifice, which would not be an act of 'Sacrifice' unless there were a Deity to whom the offering is made; hence the Deity is sub- ordinate to the Sacrifice. This, as we have seen (above) has been clearly brought out in Su. 9. 1. 6-10, in which connection we have learnt from the Bhasya that the Deity has no physical body, -It does not eat anything,-It is not either pleased or displeased, nor can it award rewards and punishments as the results of Sacri- fices. (Vide. above Sec. on Cha, Modification). 
• 
The main classification of Sacrifices is on the basis of the Substances offered. On this basis, they have been classified under the following three heads:- 
I. Işti (including also the Haviryajñas). These consist of the offering of Milk, Butter, Rice, Barley and other grains,- made by the Yajamāna (Sacrificer accompanied by his wife, and helped by four Officiating Priests). These Priests are-Adhraryu, Brahman, Hotṛ and Agnidhra; the Adhvarya is the most important among these, chosen before the rest and operating as the General Executive, from beginning to the end of the performance; his seat is on the Eastern side;-the Brahman is the second to be chosen; he is the general supervisor and inspector, well-versed in ritualistic details and in the three Vedas; it is his function also to perform the Expiatory Rites; his seat is on the Southern side:-the seat of the Hot is on the Western side, and his duty is to recite all such hymns as the Samidhenis, and the rest;-the Agnidhra is seated on the Northern side, holds the wooden sword and offers the responses with the word 'astu' to some of the acts done by the Adhvaryu. According to the last Topic of Discourse XII of the Mīmāmṣā-Sūtra, all the Priests officiating at the Sacrifice shall be Brahmanas. 
The Prakṛti or Archetype of the Isti class is the composite Darsha-Púryamāsa Sacrifice (described in Shatapatha Brāhmaṇa I and II); this, along with the following six Vikytis or Ectypes, constitutes the seven Samsthas (Forms or Stages) of the Işti. These Six Ectypes are (1) Agnyādhyāna described in Katyayana's Shrauta-Sutra 4. 179 et. seq.), (2) Agnihotra, along with its own Ectype, the Mäsägnihotra (described in Shatapatha 1. 7. 1. et seq.; and in Shrauta-Sutra 4), (3) Agrayanēsţi (Shatapatha 4. 2. 2); 
F. 46 
362 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
(4) Chaturmasya (Shrauta-Sutra 5); with its four sections, the Vaishvadeva, the Varuṇapraghasa, the Shakhamedha and the Shunāsiriya; (5) Pashubandha (Shrauta-Sû, 6 and Shatapatha 11. 7. 1), and (6) Sautrāmani (Shatapatha 11). Katyayana's Shrauta-Sūtra deals with the first five only. Gautama has men- tioned these Samsthus in the following words:- 
.अम्याधेयम्-अग्निहोत्रम् - दर्शपूर्णमासम् — श्रप्रयरणम् – चातुर्मास्यम्-- निरूढपशुबन्धः -- सौत्रामणी -- इति सप्त हविर्यज्ञसंस्थाः । 
In Shatapatha (10. 1. 5), we have the following passage:- सायम्प्रातर्ह वा श्रमुष्मिलोकेऽग्निहोत्रहुदश्नाति । अर्ध मासेऽर्धमासे दर्श पौर्णमासयाजी । चतुर्षु चतुर्षु मासेषु चातुर्मास्ययाजी -- 
षट्सु षट्सु पशुबन्धयाजी...... काममश्नाति । 
Though without the Agnyadhana, Fire-installation, no Işti- Sacrifice can be performed, as these have to be offered in the Fire consecrated by the Rites of Fire-Installation (as laid down in Shatapatha 1. 6. 3-20),-yet it is the Darsha Pūrṇamāsa, not the Agnyādhāna, that has been treated as the Archetype of the Işti-Sacrifices; firstly; because, as remarked by Karka, the Shata- patha begins with the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa, and, secondly, because the Agnyādhana is only the consecration of the Fire, and as such, cannot be regarded as a 'Sacrifice', in the strict sense of the term, on whose model the other Ectypal Sacrifices could be performed. 
Among some other Sacrifices mentioned in this connection in the Shatapatha are the Dākṣāyaṇa (described in Shrauta-Sutra 4. 104) and the Traiyambaka, 
II. The second class of Sacrifices has been called Pakayajñas. These are offered in the ordinary Domestic Fire, not in the Fire consecrated by Agnyādhāna. 
The Seven Samsthas-Forms-of the Pakayajñas are-(1) the Fire„Mahāyajñas (ennumerated and described in Shatapatha 10. 5. 6), which constitute the Archetype of the group; (2) the Aṣṭakās, (3) the Pārvaṇa-shräddha, (4) the Shrāvaṇī, (5) the Āgrahāyaṇī, (6) the Chaitri, and (7) the Ashvayuji (See Parashara- Madhava-Vyavahāra Section, P. 157, Note). These Sacrifices have been dealt with in Grhya-not Shrauta Sutras. It is on this ground, and also on the ground of these being offered 
CHAPTER XXXII: ACTS-SACRIFICES 
363 
in the Domestic-not the Consecrated-Fire, that these Sacrifices appear to have been placed in a class apart from the Haviryajñas or Istis described above. Consisting of the offering of Clarified Butter, Milk and Grains, these are as much 'Haviryajñas' (in the literal sense of the term) as the Darsha-Pūrṇamāsa and other Istis. 
III. The third class of Sacrifices are the Somayajñas, which consist of offerings of Soma-juice; of this the Archetype is the Jyotistoma (also loosely known under the name of Agnistoma). The Seven Samsthās (Forms) of this class are (1) Agniṣtoma, which is the Archetype, (2) Atyagnistoma (3) Ukthya, (4) Şoḍashin, (5) Vājapēya (Shatapatha 5; Shrauta-Sūtra 14), (6) Atirātra and (7) Aptoryamā. [See Shabara-Bhasya, Trs. P. 941, on the confusion regarding the names 'Jyotiṣṭoma' and 'Agnis- toma'. All these latter six and other 'Ectypes' or 'modifications' of the Jyotistoma, have been also called 'Ekaha', so called because they last for one day only. There are other Soma-Sacrifices- which also have the Jyotsttoma for their Archetype-that last for from two to twelve days, and these are called 'Ahina'. To this class belongs the Drädashäha (described in Shatapatha 4. 5. 1), as also the Sattras or Communistic Sacrifices, or properly speaking, Sacrificial Sessions; these latter last more than twelve days and are performed by several 'Sacrificers' (generally seventeen) in combination (See Shatapatha 4. 4. 2-12). These Sattras form the subject-matter of several Topics under the Mimämsä-Sutra (See above). Under the class of 'Soma-Sacrifice', Shatapatha, and also Katyāyana, have included the elaborate Sacrifices of the Gavāma- yana (Shrauta Su. 13), the 'Rājasūya' (Shatapatha 5, Shrauta Sū. 13), the Sautrāmaṇi (Shatapatha 11, Shrauta Su. 19), the Ashva- medha (Shatapatha 11-13, Shrauta Sû. 20); and also some minor Sacrifices, like Vasordhārā, Raṣṭrabhṛt, Vajaprasaviya, Payovrata and so forth. (Shatapatha 4). Almost all Soma-Sacrifices involve the killing of an animal (which must be a goat, according to Mīmā. Sū. 10. 2. 69, Bhāṣya Trs. P. 1733); hence the older writers have included the 'Pashu' (Animal) Sacrifices under 'Soma'. Later writers appear to make some sort of a distinction between 'Soma' and 'Animal' Sacrifices; such distinction is found in the Shrautapadarthanirvachana, a modern work written towards the end of the nineteenth century. There is however no authority for this distinction either in Shatapatha or in the Shrauta-Sutra. 
364 
PURVA-MIMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
'DAKṢINA'-SACRIFICIAL FEE 
The 'Sacrificial Fee', Dakṣṇā, payable to the Priests for officiating at Sacrifices, has been made the subject-matter of several "Topics' under the Mima. Sutra. 
Under Su. 10. 2. 22-28, Jaimini has discussed the purpose for which the Fee is given; and the conclusion he has arrived at is that it should be regarded as serving the purpose of hiring or se- curing the services of the Priests, (Su. 10. 2. 23); and it is not for the purpose of bringing about any merit or such transcendental results. But at the Kumeşti Sacrifice, the Fee serves a transcen- dental purpose (Su. 10. 2. 44).. 
Under Su. 10. 3. 53-55, he has discussed the question of the apportionment of the Fee among the serveral Priests. The con- clusion on this point is that in the matter of wages-i.e., the Fee- there is to be inequality; but this inequality is based, not upon the basis of work done,-as the hiring of services is equal for all, -but upon the basis of the titles of the Priests-(Su. 10. 3—55). That is to say, it is not right to regard the 'inequality' among Priests as due to their work,-it should be due to the help rendered by the Priests as indicated by their titles; these titles are 'Halfist', "Tertiarist', 'Quarterist'; these titles are found in the following text-The Adhvaryu Priest, having initiated the Master of the House, initiates the Brahman Priest, then the Udgatṛ, then the Hoty; thereupon the Pratiprasthātṛ Priest, having initiated the Adhvaryu, initiates the Halfists-i.e., (1) the Brahmaṇāch- chhamsin Priest, who is related to the Brahman Priest, (2) the Prastotr Priest, who is related to the Udgatṛ Priest, (3) the Maitrāvaruna Priest, who is related to the Hotr Priest; then the Nestr-Priest, having initiated the Pratiprasthatṛ Priest, initiates the Tertiarists,-i.e., the Agnidhra Priest, who is related to the Brahman Priest, the Pratiharty Priest, who is related to the Udgātṛ Priest; then the Unnētṛ-Priest, having initiated the Nestr, initiates the Quarterists,-i.e., the Potr Priest, who is re- lated to the Brahman Priest, the Subrahmanya-Priest, who is related to the Udgatṛ-Priest and the Grävastut-Priest, who is related to the Hotr-Priest.' The reference to the Priests by these titles 'Halfist', "Tertiarist' and 'Quarterist'-would be justifiable only if, at the Archetypal Sacrifice, the shares of the Fee given to 
CHAPTER XXXII: ACTS-SACRIFICES 
365 
We con- 
these men were actually in accordance with these titles. clude therefore that, on account of their being referred to as 'Halfists' etc., the diversity in the Fee received by them should be treated as based upon these titles. (Bhasya, Trs. p. 1777). 
Jaimini has discussed a few other details regarding the Sacrificial Fee, under Su. 10. 3. 39 et. seq. 
(1) The Sacrificial Fee for the Jyotisṭoma has been laid down in the text "The Cow, the Horse, the Mule, the Ass, Goats, Sheep, Corns, Barley, Sesamum, Maşa,-Dvādashashatam of this is the Fee'. The question raised is-Is the Fee to consist of 112 of each of the things mentioned? Or 112 of one of the things mentioned? or 112 made up of all the things together? 
[The term 'Dvadashashatum' has been taken as standing for Twelve and Hundred, i.e., 112; in his presentation of this Adhi- karana, Mandana has said 'Shatam gavāmēva tu dakṣiņā syāt; and the Nyayamālāvistara has explained the term 'Dvadashashatam' as 'Dvādashādhikam Shatam'; hence the number should be taken as 112, not 1200]. 
The Established Conclusion is that the particular number 112 qualifies only one of the several kinds of things mentioned; hence the prescribed Fee should consist of 112 of one of the several kinds enumerated. (Bhasya. Trs. p. 1769). (Su. 10. 3. 39-44), 
(2) The next question is -To which one thing does the number 112 refer? The answer to this is that it refers to one of the animals named (S. 10. 3. 45),-and among animals, the Cow (Su. 10. 3. 47). Hence 112 Cows should be given as the Fee (Bhagya, Trs. p. 1772). 
(3) Next question-Should 112 Cows be given to each of the Priests? Or should 112 Cows be divided among them? The answer is that the Fee should be given by apportionment (Su. 10. 3. 50); and this 'apportionment' shall be according to the titles of the Priests as already explained. (Su. 10. 3. 53-55). (See above). 
This 'apportionment' is described as under (in the Jyotistoma Paddhatis) where only 100 Cows are mentioned along with 100 gold-pieces-12 each to the (1) Brahman, (2) Udgåtṛ, (3) Hotṛ, 
366 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
and (4) Adhavaryu; 6 each to the (1) Pratiprasthātṛ, (2) Prastoty, (3) Maitrāvaruna and (4) Brāhmaṇāchchhamsin; 4 each to the (1) Potr, (2) Nestr, (3) Achchhāvāku and (4) Agnidhra;-3 each to the (1) Unnetṛ, (2) Grāvastut, (3) Subrahmanya and (4) Pratiharty. The total of these comes to 100 only. This would appear to be in keeping with the words of Maydan- शतं गवामेव तु दक्षिणा स्यात् । 
CHAPTER XXXIII 
INFLUENCE OF MIMAMSA ON LEGAL AND OTHER BRANCHES OF LITERATURE. 
The Mimamsa-Sutra has evolved a set of principles for the interpretation of texts. It has based its Discussions on texts deal- ing with the details of sacrificial ritual; and the reason for this lay in the fact that at the time that the Sutra was written, and the principles of Mimāmsā systematised, the performance of ela- borate Sacrifices was a familiar occurrence in the life of the ordin- ary Hindu. At a later age, when these Sacrifices fell into desuetude the study of the Mimämsä was found difficult. and it fell in the popular estimation. But before long it was discovered that though the illustrations chosen in Mimämsä Literature, showing the application of the Principles of Interpretation, may not appeal to the learner, yet the Principles were as useful as ever, in other fields, wherever original texts had to be studied and their exact signification discussed. This was specially so in the domain of Law. This branch of study had to deal with a large number of original texts, from the Vedas and from the Smrtis; and the range of this study therefore extended from the Vedas down to the most recent Smrti-compilations; and as there were some discrepancies in these texts bearing on many points in regard to the practices of men, the only reasonable basis for the explaining away of these discrepancies lay in the Principles of Interpretation that had been worked out by the Mimamsaka in connection with Vedic texts bearing upon the details of Sacrificial ritual. We accordingly find all writers of Legal Digests making free use of these Principles of Interpretation. 
We shall cite a few instances from the more authoritative Legal Digests, of cases where the said Principles have been utilised in coming to a conclusion. 
(1)Under 2. 126, Yajnavalkya has laid down that after the regular Partition has been finished,-if some property is found to have been surreptitiously hidden away by any of the partners, 
367368 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĂ IN ITS SOURCES 
that property should be recovered from him and divided among all the co-partners in equal shares. In this connection the question is raised as to whether this surreptitious possession is reprehensible or not; the argument in support of the view that "it is not reprehensible" is that the partner who has been in wrongful possession has also some right over the property concerned, and hence, as he has been keeping the property only under the mis- conception that it is solely his own, his conduct cannot be regarded as entirely reprehensible;-this argument is based upon what has been argued under Mīmāmsā-Sūtra 6. 3. 20,-where, the question being raised as to the propriety of changing the Mudga-corn that has been kept for the making of the flour but has become spoilt,- the other party has argued that-if the Sacrificer has substituted an equal quantity of the Mășa-corn, under the honest misappre- hension that it is Mudga,-his action cannot be regarded as a contravention of the rule that forbids the use of the Maşa; because, though he has actually used the 
actually used the Masa, he has used it as Mudga. Under the Mimämsä-Sutra referred to, this view has been rejected, and the conclusion arrived at is that the use of the Maşa under the circumstances certainly constitutes an infringement of the rule that forbids the use of Mășa, Kodrava and Chanaka. In accordance with this conclusion the conduct of the Partner who has been in wrongful possession of a part of the common property has been regarded as reprehensible. 
(2) In regard to the widow's rights of inheritance, some writers have argued that-in as much as all property is meant primarily for the purpose of performing Sacrifices,-to which the Woman is not entitled.-she can have no business to inherit the Property ;- that the Woman, apart from her husband, is not entitled to per- form Sacrifices has been shown under Mimämṣā-Sutra 6. 1. 17-21; though in the preceding Sutras it has been shown that she can- not be held to be absolutely not-entitled to such performance, as, in the company of her husband, she has her place at all Sacrifices. (See above). 
The argument against the rights of Women has been met by another reasoning based upon Mimāmsā-Sūtra 3. 4. 26-30; where it has been shown that the Wearing of Gold by the Sacrificer and the Priests has no bearing upon the Sacrificial Performance;— and on the basis of this conclusion it has been argued that, if all 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MIMÄMSÄ 
369 
Property were meant for Sacrificial Performance, from where would the gold be got for the said wearing? The Gold worn is certainly 'property', and yet it does not have any bearing upon the Sacrificial Performance. The Mitakṣara on 2. 135 has argued If all Property were meant for Sacrificial Performances, there would be no charity or works of Public Utility, like the digging of Tanks and the like'. 
(3) In regard to the share to which the Wife is entitled, there are following texts:- 
(a) यदि कुर्यात्समानंशान् पत्न्यः कार्याः समाशिकाः । 
'If the Proprietor effects an equal division of his property during his life-time, he should assign equal shares to his wives'. 
(b) पितुरुर्ध्व विमजतामाताप्यंशं समंहरेत् । 
'If the partition is effected after the Father's death, the Mother should receive an equal share.' 
According to these texts, the Wife's share in the property of her Husband is equal to that of each of his sons. 
Some writers have held that the Wife is entitled to a mere subsistence-allowance, not to any share in the Property; and they have interpreted these texts to mean that-If the Property is ex- tensive, the Wife is to receive just enough to maintain her; but it the Property is small, she is to share it equally with her sons. Against this view, it has been argued that such an interpretation would cause an incongruity in the above texts; as, under the pro- posed interpretation, the first would mean that she is to receive merely a subsistence-allowance, while the second would give her a share equal to that of the sons. That such incongruous interpretation of Injunctivé Texts is not permissible has been shown under Mimămṣā-Sūtra 7. 3. 19-25. The argument adumberated under these Sutras is as follows:-In connection with the Chatur- māsya-Sacrifice, the Vedic Injunction has laid down 'Agni- Pranayana', the Fetching of Fire;-there are two such fetchings' 
-one connected with the Agnistoma-Sacrifice, which is accom panied by many other details, and the other connected with the Darsha-Purṇamāsa, which is simpler, and without any other de- tails; the question arises as to which of these two Fetchings has to be adopted at the Chaturmäsya; the conclusion is that it must be the latter. Upon this, there arises the further question-At 
F. 47 
370 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
which of the four sections of the Chatrmasya-the Vaishvadeva, the Varuṇapraghāsa, the Shākamedhiya, or the Sunasiriya,-is the said Fetching to be done? The conclusion is that it should be done at the second and third sections;-though the Prima Facie View is that "the fetching should be done at the first and fourth sec- tions, because the Fetching has to be done on the Uttaravēdī, and the use of the Uttaravedi is related to the First and the Fourth sections only, this relationship being deduced from the prohibi- tion of the use of this Vedi at the First and Fourth Sections; which prohibition implies the possibility of such use at the said sections;" -in answer to this argument it has been shown that such an inter- pretation of the texts concerned leads to an incongruity in the text enjoining the use of the Uttaravēdi;—that is, in regard to the First and Fourth sections, its use is implied by the Prohibition (as urged above),-and as such, it could be intended for partial acceptance only, while with regard to the second and third sections, the use of the Uttararēdi has been laid down directly and hence permanently;—in this way the l'eda would be laying down two entirely divergent courses of action,-under the Prima Facie View; and this cannot be desirable. This argument has been applied to the case of the above-mentioned texts bearing upon the Wife's rights; and it is argued that so long as a text affords one coherent meaning, there can be no justification for breaking up its mean- ing into two incoherent parts; hence there can be no justification for the interpretation placed upon the texts to mean that the Wife is to receive only a subsistence-allowance and so forth. 
5 
(4) In connection with the rights of the Parents over the Property left by their childless Son, the question arises as to which of the two parents-the Mother or the Father-has the prior claim. The text bearing upon the question mentions the word 'Pitaran'- 'Parents'; and would therefore appear to leave the matter doubtful; but it has been argued that in as much as the word 'Pitarau' has been etymologically explained in authoritative Grammatical works as equivalent to 'Mātāpitaran',-and as in this the Mātā (Mother) is mentioned first, hers should be the prior claim. This reasoning is based upon Mimämsä-Sūtra 5-14 to 7, where it has been shown that the Prayājas-Samid, Tanūnapāt, etc.-are to be performed in the order in which they are mentioned in the injunctive texts, -in accordance with the accepted Principle that the Priority of mention leads to priority in action. (Mītākṣavā, on 2. 135). 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MIMĀMSĀ 
371 
(5) The adoption of a son, has to be done with full Vedic rites and ceremonies, even when done by the Shudra, who would be entitled to the performance of such Rites, in accordance with the conclusions arrived at in connection with the 'Nisada-chief- under Mi. Sü. 6. 1. 51,-and the 'Rathakara' under Mi. Sū 6. 1. 44; where it has been shown that though as a general rule the Shudra becomes entitled to such performances, and hence also yet in the special cases of the Nişada Chief, and the Rathakāra, the Shūdra becames entitled to such performances, and hence also to the learning of the relevant Mantra-texts and reciting them at the performance. According to some writers, though the special Sacrifices have been laid down for the Shüdra, the Vedic Mantras have to be recited by Brāhmaṇa-proxies of the Shūdra Sacrificer. But the generally-accepted conclusion is that these are to be treat- ed as exceptional cases and thus do not vitiate the general conclu- sion that the Shūdra is not entitled to the performance of Vidic Rites, as propounded in Mīmā. Sü. 6. 1. 25. 
(6) In regard to Adoption, it has been declared that the woman can ‘adopt' a Son only in the company of her husband, or when permitted by him; as she, alone by herself, is not entitled to perform Vedic Rites and Ceremonies, and the performance of such rites is inseparable from all regular Adoption. The exclusion of Women from Sacrificial Performances has been discussed above, as dealt with in Mīmā. Sū. 6. 1. 6. The 'permission' of the Husband has been regarded as implying the 'presence' of the Husband himself at the ceremony of Adoption. 
(7) In connection with Adoption, Manu has declared that a child that has been adopted in another family cannot inherit the property of his Progenitor-Father, nor perform his Shraddha; and though the text directly prohibits these two things only, yet it has been accepted as implying the prohibition of other cognate things also, such as all relationships and connections due to the Progenitor-Father. This is in accordance with the principles laid down in Mimā. Sū. 3. 7. 13 (Shabara-Bhasya, Text, Page 71, Line 15); wherein it has been shown that the texts-(a) 'Antarvēdi. minoti' (Measures in the central Altar') and (b) Jataputraḥ kṛṣṇakeshi 'gninadadhita' ('One should install the Fires after he has got a Son and while his hair is still black'), even though directly mentioning only a few definite characteristics, are to be 
372 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
regarded as implying (a) any place within the Altar, not neces- sarily the centre, and (b) any particular period of the man's life, not necessarily the time when his hair is black. 
(8) It has been ruled by the Privy Council that the adoption of an only son of his father is legal. This decision has been sought to be based upon Mīmā. Sū. 1. 2. 26-27. It has been shown above that in this case the Mimämsä-Rule has been misunderstood and misapplied. (See in this connection a detailed account of this in K. L. Sarkar's Mimämsä Rules of Interpretation pp. 451 et seq.), The case referred to here is the one cited as Sri Balasu Guru Linga Swami vs. Sir Balwan Ramalakṣamina and others; Rādhamonhan, representative of Beni Prasad vs. Hardei Bibi L.R. 26 I.A. 113, S.C.I. L.R. 21, Allahabad 460. 
The above are only examples-just to illustrate 
how the Mimämsä Rules have influenced the administration of Law, even by the present Courts of Law. In this connection the Reader is referred to the above-mentioned book of Sarkar's: Lecture XI of this book is to be read by persons interested in the comparative study of Law; as here Dr. Sarkar has shown the resemblance be- tween the Mimämsä Rules of Interpretation and Maxims and those adopted and used in modern Law. 
The following are a few instances of the use made of the Mimāmsā Maxims in other branches of Sanskrit Literature. 
(1) The Kalañjanyāya (Jaimini Sū. 6. 2. 19-20) has been used (a) by Anandagiri in his comment on the Shariraka-Bhasya (under 3. 4. 28 and 4. 1. 13);-(b) in Samṣepashārīraka (1. 417 —20);—(c) in Shri-bhāṣya (1. 1. 4). 
(2) The Grahaikatvanyāya (Jaimini Sū, 3. 1. 13-15) is used —(a) in Nyāyamañjarī (P. 287);— in l'ēdāntashikḥāmaṇi (P. 120); (c) by Kayyaṭa on Mahābhāṣya (1. 1. 69); and (d) by Nāgësha on Kayyața (1. 1. 14). 
(3) Rātrisattranyāya (Jaimini Sū. 4. 13. 17-19) has been used-(a) in l'edantakalpataru and Parimala on Su. 3. 3. 38, and on 1. 2. 24;—(b) in Pañchapādikāvivaraṇa (pp. 122 and 134); and (c) in Tattva-mukhtākalāpa (5. 81). 
(4) Vishvajinnyāya (Shabara p. 496.) is used-(a) in Bhamati (1. 1. 4); (b) in Vedantakalpataru (P. 430);-(c) in Panchapādi- kāvīvaraṇa (pp. 134, 137, 164); and (d) in Nyayāmañjari (P. 524). 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MĪMĀMSĀ 
373 
Shankarāchārya has quoted and utilised the Mimāmsā-Sūtra and Nyāyas, very profusely. The following are a few Examples. The page-references are to the Shariraka-Bhāṣya with Ratna- prabhā-Bhāmati and Anandagiri, published by the Nirnayasāgara Press, 1909. 
P. 675-Sūtra 3. 3. 1-Agnihotranyāya applied. 
P. 717-Sū. 3. 3. 25—'Shrutiliñga-vākya, etc.' (83. 3. 13) 
quoted and applied. 
P. 724—Su. 3. 3. 26—Mimāmsā-Sūtra quoted-'Api tu 
rākyasheṣaḥ syāt, etc.' 
P. 730-Sũ. 3. 3. 31—Prakaraṇādya-niyāmakatvam. P. 737-Mimāmsä-Sūtra 3. 3. 8 quoted. 
P. 740-Abhyasāt karmabhēdaḥ'. 
P. 749-under Su. 3. 3. 4. 
P. 750-under Sũ. 3. 3. 42. 
P. 760-under Sü. 3. 3. 49, where the Vedanta-Sutra itself 
asserts Shrutyädibaliyast vāchchana bādhaḥ'. 
P. 762-Under Sü. 3. 3. 50. 
P. 764-under Su. 3. 3. 53-Shabara-Bhasya referred to. 
P. 793-under Sü. 3. 4. 20 
P. 797-under Sü. 3. 4. 21. 
P. 803-804-under Sü. 3. 4. 27. 
P. 813-under Sù. 3. 4. 42. 
P. 899-under Sü. 4. 4. 12. 
The following instances of the influence of Purvamīmāmsā upon several branches of Literature have been culled from Colonel Jacob's Handful of Popular Marims:-- 
(1) When there is a crowd of people, and some of them are umbrellas'. It is the maxim which has been set forth in Tantra- umbrellas'. It is the maxim which has been set forth in Tantra- vārtika (1. 4. 13); and this has been utilised by Shankara in his Bhasya on the Vedanta-Sutra (3. 3. 34), where he says "Though the text Rtampibantau' speaks of drinking by both Jivatma and Paramātamā, yet to the Paramātmā it applies only on the analogy of the Men with Umbrellas, whereunder even though the man is not 
374 
PURVA-MIMAMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
carrying the umbrella, yet he is spoken of as such on account of his being accompanied by men with umbrellas. 
(2) When rice is being cooked, the cook becomes assured of all of it having been properly cooked, when he presses a single grain and finds it sufficiently softened. On the analogy of this, the condition of the whole class is inferred from that of a part. This is found in Mimāmsă-Sūtra-Bhāṣya under 7. 4. 12. It is called the Sthālīpulākanyāya. 
(3) As a Post is driven into the ground by repeated efforts, so a proposition is strengthened by the bringing forward of a succes- sion of facts and arguments. This forms, the basis of the maxim styled स्थूणानिखननन्याय, 
which finds place in Shankara's Shariraka-bhāṣya, under Sutra 2. 1. 34 and 3. 3. 53. This maxim has its origin in Shabara-Başya, on Sũ. 7. 2. 1. 
J 
Shankara in his Shārīraka-bhāṣya on 1. 3. 25 says "The Shastra, though proprounded without distinction, is in reality, meant for human beings only, and for those of the three higher castes only, because these alone are capable of complying with the precepts of the Shastra, etc. etc. This point has been explained in the definition of Adhikara-that is, in the Purva-mimamsā-Sūtra 6. 1. 1-3. This is called the Adhikaranyāya. 
(5) The Vivaraṇapramāyasañgraha (P. 247)-speaks of 'abun- dance of fruit produced by abundance of labour involved in the effort towards the performance of a large number of Subsidiary details'. This is a paraphrase of what the Shabara-Bhāṣya has declared under Su. 10. 6. 62 and 11. 1. 5. 
(6) Under Su. 12. 2. 34, Shabara says-"It is incumbent upon the Pupil to eat out of the plate made of bell-metal; it is not so incumbent for the Teacher; yet whenever it so happens that the Pupil has to eat out of the same plate as the Teacher, the latter eats out of the plate of bell-metal; so as not to disturb the vow of the Pupil". This has been called the 'Kamsya-bhoji-Nyāya' which has been used in Bhamati (P. 478), Vedāntakalpataru (Pages 314, 425, 502, 517), and also in Parimala (Pp. 462, 572, 666). 
(7) Under 1. 1. 2, Page 6, of the Tantravārtika Kumārila says -"Even if it be necessary to ascend the mountain-peak in order to see an object, that object, cannot be regarded as invisible".-This has been quoted and used in the Nyāyamañjarī (P. 422). 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MIMĀMSĀ 
375 
(8) Shabara on Sú. 2. 4. 20 and Kumārila in Tantaravārtika P. 16, have declared that-"When a Vedic text condemns the con- demnable thing, it is not for the purpose of condemning, but for the purpose of commending what is commendable". This has been quoted by Anandagiri in his comment on the Bṛhadaraṇyaka- bhagya 2. 5. 16; and has been utilised in the Agamaprāmāṇya (P. 51). Another reference to this maxim is found in Nyāyamañ- jari P. 273. 
(9) Shabara under Sü. 11. 1. 60 says "The lamp, though placed near one person among a number of persons dining together, helps all of them."This same idea is found expressed in the Mahā- bhasya on 1. 1. 49;-also by Nagesha in his Uddyota. 
(10) Under Su. 4. 4. 19, Shabara has laid down the principle that "A Sacrificial Act is to be regarded as Primary or indepen- dent when a special result is declared as following from it; if, therefore, an act is enjoined without the specification of any result following from it, it must be regarded as Subsidiary to some other Primary act." This occurs in Shankara's Shārīraka-bhāṣya on Sũ. 2. 1. 14; also used by Vachaspati Mishra in the Tātparyatīkā (P. 178, line 2); and by Vidyaranya in Vivaraṇa- pramēyasangraha (P. 117, line 11 and P. 147, line 9 from bottom). 
(11) Kumarila, in Tantravārtika (1. 3. 22) says "Where a certain conclusion to the contrary has been set forth in an excep- tionally powerful manner, if one proceeds immediately to point out the correct view, this becomes a difficult task; hence with a view to lighten the task, Jaimini proceeds, at first, to weaken the contrary view by throwing it open to doubt." This principle has been adopted by the Nyayamañjarī (p. 419). 
(12) Kumārila in Shlokavārtika (p. 520) says that-"men whose eyes are smeared with the fat of frogs mistake bamboo- pieces for snakes". This illustration has been used in Tatpar- yatika (P. 314), by l'achaspati Mishra; by Sarvarthasiddhi on Tattvamukta-Kalāpa (2. 64); and by Parimala (P. 43, line 9). 
(13) Kumārila, in Tantravārtika on Su. 1. 3. 31 (P. 730) has declared that "a man who has accepted the teaching of Shruti will not allow it to be upset by a contrary Smṛti"; and in support of this he has cited the illustration that the Donkey can never · 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MĪMĀMSĀ 
377 
in Panchapadika (P. 45); and also in Vivaraṇapremayasngraha (P. 118, line 9). The Mahabhāṣya (on 1. 1. 23) adds another illustration: Where canals are made for irrigating paddy-fields, they also provide water for bathing and drinking. 
(20) 'Apachchhedanyaya':-Under Mi. Su. 6. 5. 40-56, we have discussed the rule whereby, when the Priests are proceeding from the Havirdhana in a line in a certain order, holding each other's garments, if the line is disturbed by any one, an Expiation has to be performed. This maxim has been employed by writers on Vedanta, in Vēdāntakalhataruparimala (P. 10. line 8). It has also been called the Paurvaparya-nyāya, in accordance with the wording of the Mima. Su. 6. 3. 54. This Sutra is quoted in Bhimati (P. 5); and by the same author in his Tatparyaṭīkā (p. 59). The Apachchhédanyāya occurs in Sarvārthasiddhi (pages 210, 359 and 374); also in Shri-bhāṣya (P. 143). 
. (21) "The Scripture has its use in regard to things not known by other means of knowledge.' This maxim has been adumbrated in Mi. Su. 6. 2. 18. It has been used in Shariraka-Bhāṣya (3. 3. 18); also in Shri-Bhasya (P. 554); in Nyāyakandali (p. 5); in Chitsukhi (1. 7); in Sarva-darshanasañgraha (P. 69); in Sarvarthasiddhi (P. 893 and 263); and in Tattvadipana (P. 544). 
(22) 'Gourds sink in water-and Stones float'.-Often quoted as an instance of absurd assertion. It is found in Shabara- Bhāṣya (1. 1. 5 and 4. 3. 10); and is used also in Sankṣēpashārīraku (2. 2). 
(23) The maxim of the red-one-year-old-cow', mentioned in Mīmā. Sū. 3. 1. 12. It is based upon the Vedic text-'One buys Soma with the red-one-year-old', which does not mention the object to which these qualifications belong; and it is argued that according to this text, these qualifications are auxiliary to the act of buying; but only through the object, the Cow, to which they belong. This maxim has been used in Shri-Bhāṣya (1. 1. 13). 
(24) "The conventional denotation of a word is more acceptable than its etymological signification'. This is used by Kumarila in Tantravārtika (P. 150, line 12);-also in Nyayamañjari (P. 534 line 15). 
(25) 'How could a sane person riding a horse forget the horse?" This has been said in Tantravārtika (1. 3. 18) in connection with 
F. 48378 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
authoritative writers on Grammar making use of ungrammatical expressions. This has been used by Mallinatha in his comment on Tārkikarakṣā (P. 20). It is found in Nagārjunia's Mādhyami- kārṛtti (P. 502). 
(26) 'When Verbs express their meanings, Potency is a con- tributary cause'. This has its origin in what Shabara has said under Mi. Sú. 1. 4. 30. It has been employed in the sense that when the Vedic text enjoins a certain act, the capacity of a person is an important factor. It has been used in Sureshvara's Samban- dhavārtika (75). See also Tantravārtika under 2. 2. 27; Page 558, Line 9. 
(27) Kapiñjalanyāya'—“The maxim of the Partridges'. In Vājasaneyi-Samhitā (24. 20), there is a text laying down the sacrificing of 'partridges'; and under Mimā. Sū. 11. 1. 38-45, we have the discussion as to the exact number of birds to be sacri- ficed; the conclusion is that three should be Sacrificed; as that is the lowest figure representing the plurality expressed by the word of the text-Kapiñjalān'. This has been used in Nyayakanndalı (P. 50); also in Parimala (P. 550, line 3); in Shikhāmaṇi (P. 303); by Kulluka on Manu'. p. 105. 
(28) "The Cleansing of the Blanket'. The practice of dusting the blanket by beating it against one's feet and thus dusting the feet also, has been used by Shabara (on Sũ. 2. 2. 25), to illustarate the double purpose served by the Curd;-it accomplishes the particular offering and also brings about the desired result. This forms the basis of the well-known saying of killing two birds with one stone',-This has been used also in connection with the offering of water to the Pitrs at Gaya, on the roots of mango-trees, in connection with which offering we have the verse-f eft after santa fata: facez QAT: 1 
NKA. 
(29) 'The maxim of the Kalañja'. The Vedic text says- 'Kalañjam na bhakṣayēt, The question is raised in Mīmā. Sū. 6. 2. 19 whether this contains a positive injunction-meaning that 'one should take the vow of not eating the Kalanja'-or a negative injunction-meaning that 'one should not eat the Kalañja'; and the conclusion is in favour of the latter-that the text serves the purpose of the prohibition of an act. It has been quoted by Anandagiri on Shārīrāka-Bhāṣya (3. 4. 2 and 4. 1. 13); also in Sankṣepashārīraka 1, 417; and in Shri-Bhṣāya (1. 1, 4). 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MÏMĀMSĀ 
379 
(30) 'Kāṇḍānusamayanyāya'-Set forth in Mi. Su, 5. 2. 3- 'When a number of operations are performed over a number of objects, all the operations over one object should be completed before they are taken up over the second object, and so on.' This is used in Ashvalayana's Gṛhyasutra (1, 24. 7), where, during the process of the receiving of the Priests, the various acts pre- scribed are laid down as to be completed with one Priest, before the reception of the second Priest. The reverse of this is the 'Padarthānukramanyāya'. (See below). 
(31) The maxim of the Base Coin-is used in Tantravārtiku 1. 3. 3 (P. 95); when arguing that where the Smrti is found to be in conflict with Shruti, it should be rejected;--just as the counter- feit coin is to be rejected as soon as it is found to be counterfeit. It has been used in Nyayamanjari (P. 162 and 169, 187 and 531). 
(32) The maxim of the Garhapatya Fire, is presented in Mi. Sü. 3. 2. 3-4, where it is concluded that where there is conflict between Direct Injunction and Implied Injunction, the former is to be accepted. This maxim has been used in Bhamati under Sū. 3. 3. 25, and also in other Vedanta works. 
(33) The maxim of the Milking Vessel-represented in Mi. Sū. 4. 1. 2,-as dealing with cases where a particular rule sets aside the general Law; Water is fetched in ordinary jars, but at the Sacrifice performed for the purpose of acquiring cattle, it should be fetched in the milking vessel. It is found in Tantra- vārtika (3. 6. 43); in Nyayamañjarī (P. 166); in Shariraka-Bhāṣya (3. 3. 42); in Sureshvaravārtika on Bṛhadāranyaka 3. 3. 51. 
(34) Barhirnyāya-The maxim of the Kusha(grass;-The sense of this is that in a case where a word may be taken either in the primary or in the secondary sense, it should be taken in the primary sense. This is the conclusion arrived in Mi. Sū. 3. 2. 1-2. It is found in Mahābhāṣya 1. 1. 15, and 6. 3. 46; also in Sharira- kabhāṣya 4. 3. 12; and in Kalpataru P. 346, line 3. 
(35) Grahaikatvanyaya-The Maxim of the Single Cup. This is illustrated in Mi. Sú. 3.1. 13-15, where it is argued that when the text lays down the washing of the Cup, fe, though the word 'Cup' is in the singular, yet the washing should be done to all the cups. Kumarila has explained this under Sü. 3.1.14. It has been used in Nyayamañjarī, p. 287, line 4; in Vedanta- 
380 
PURVA-MIMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
shikhamani, p. 120; by Nagesha in his comment on Kayyața on 1. 1. 14. 
(36) Jăteşti-nyaya-treated by Jaimini under Mi. Sú. 4.3. 38-39; where, in regard to the Sacrifice offered on the birth of a son, the question is raised whether the reward thereof accrues to the Father or the Son, and the conclusion arrived at is that it accrues to the Son. It is used in the Commentory on Laksaṇā- vali. 
(37) Tatprakhyanyāya-Embodied in Mi. Su. 1.4.4, which explains one of the four means for ascertaining that a certain text mentions the Proper Name of a Sacrifice; e.g., the word 'Agni- hotra' as occurring in the text ‘Agnihotrēņa juhoti'. It is employ- ed in Vedāntakalpataru-parimala, p. 150, line 7; and in Nagesha's Uddyota (Vol. 3, p. 623; under Su. 2.3.3). 
(38) Tadaditadantanya-Embodied in Mi. Sú. 5.1. 23-24. This has been adopted in Vedāntakalpataruparimala 
line 9). 
p. 581, 
(38) The maxim that 'a certain thing is sure to appear when a certain other thing appears';-this has been employed by Kumārila in Tantravārtika (p. 348) in establishing the invariable concomitance between the Affix and the Bhāvanā, 
(40) Tadvyapadēshanyāya'—is represented by Mi. Sü. 1. 4. 5, which sets forth another means of ascertaining that a certain word is the Proper Name of a Sacrifice. 
(41) 'Acts which impel others to action are not always of the same kind'. This is exemplified by Kumarila in Shlokavārtika (p. 710). In battle, the soldier acts through moving his sword, the commander acts through giving orders, and the King acts by his mere presence'. This has been used by Shankaracharya in his Bhasya on the Mundakopaniṣad. 
(42) The maxim of the Dancer. The Dancer, dancing before a number of persons, gives pleasure to all at the same time. See Nyayavartika 1.10, and also Tatparyaṭikā. 
(43) 'One does not undergo the expense of performing a Sacrifice, for the purpose of recovering a Shell'. This occurs in Shabara, under 4.3.39. 
(44) Maxim of the Cow's Milk contained in a vessel made of Dog-skin'; based on Kumārila's Vārtika on Mit Su. 1.3.7; to show 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MIMAMSĀ 
381 
that even a pure thing becomes impure by association or contact. with impure things: hence the teaching of sound morality contain- ed in the Scriptures of heterodox people cannot be as reliable as those contained in the Veda. This has been employed in Agama- prāmānya by Yamunacharya (on page 11, line 8). Cf. Visnu- Smrti 29.9; and Manu-Smpti 2.114. 
(45) 'Man is not so prompted by even a hundred Injunctions as he is by Greed'. This is found in Tantravārtika under Mi. Sú. 3.4.34. This is used in Nyāyamañjari (p. 361);—also in Nyaya- kanika (p. 407); and in Sambandhavārtika (Verses 1040 and 1041); and in Anubhutiprakāsha (13.277). Ct. Mahābhāṣya 1.3.72. 
(46) 'If a Potency is not present in a thing by itself, it can- not be produced in it by something else'. This occurs in Kumā- rila's Shlokavrtika (2. 47); it is used in Shariratha-Bhāṣya 2.1.24; —in Nyāyakaṇikā (P. 168);—and in Nyāyamañjarī (P. 165). 
(47) There can be no cognition of the Qualified unless there is cognition of the Qualification'.—Shabara on Mĩ Sũ. (1.3.33). It is used in Kusunaijali (3. 21); in Saptapadarthi (p. 2, line 6); in Tānkikarakṣā (pp. 47 and 107); Nyāyasūtravṛtti (2. 126); and in Nyāyamañjarī (pp. 320, 433, 449, 538, 543). 
(48) 'Maxim of the Nişadasthapati'. Mi. Sü. 6. 1. 51-52 deals with the text Nişādasthapatim yājayēt; where a question is raised as to the exact signification of the term 'Nişādasthapati' :- Does it mean the Sthapati, king of the Nisadas' (the Nişada being a sub-caste not entitled to perform Sacrifices) or 'the king who is a Niṣāda'? The latter interpretation makes the Niṣāda king entitled to perform Sacrifices. The conclusion is in favour of the latter interpretation, which makes the Visada king entitled to perform the one particular Sacrifice. This explanation implies the Grammatical Convention that as a general rule the Karma- dharaya compound is to be given preference to the Tatpuruşa. This has been employed by lachaspati Mishra in the Bhamati on Sü. 1.3.15; in justifying his explanation of the compound 'Brahma- loka'; so also by Rāmānuja in the Shri-bhasya on the same Sūtra. It is found in the Vedantakalpataru and also in the Parimala, on the same Sutra; it is quoted by Anandagiri on Shariraka- bhāṣya on 3. 3. 24, and by Nágésha on Kayyața (. 1. 3). 
382 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSÂ IN ITS SOURCES 
(49) 'Padarthānusamayanyāya'. The obverse of the 'Kanda- nusamayanyāya' (above, No. 30); represented by Mi. Su. 5.2. 1-2; according to this the whole set of operations are to be performed on one object, before the other object is taken in. See Karka- bhasya on Katyāyana-Shrauta Sutra 1.114. 
(50) In regard to the external world, the Mind is dependent upon others'. (Vidhivivēka, p. 114); found in Sarvadarshanasan- graha (Chapter 1); in Chitsukhi (1. 12); in Vidyasagari on Khnndanakhandakhadya (p. 307). 
(51) Parnamayi-nyāya'—indicates the invariable presence of something; the Juhu made of Parna (Leaves, or the wood of Palasha tree) being used at all Sacrifices; as dealt with by Shabara under Mi. Sü. 3.6. 1-8. Used in Bhamati on 3.3.61; and Parimala, pp. 624 and 626. 
(52) Pathakramanyaya;-the Maxim of Textual Sequence. In the Fifth Discourse of Mima. Su. Pada 1,-we find Six kinds of Sequence set forth-(1) Directly enjoined Sequence, (2) Logical Sequence, (3) Textual Sequence, (4) Practical Sequence, (5) Se- quence of Place, and (6) Sequence of Primary. When acts are performed in accordance with the order in which they are men- tioned in the Vedic text, e.g.. (1) Samidho yajati-(2) Tanuna- pātam yajati, etc.'. we have the Patha-krama, Textual Sequence. Four of the above Six kinds of Sequence are mentioned in Bhāmati on 1.1.1; which have been enlarged upon in Kalpataru, pp. 32- 34; again in Bhamati on 4.3.6, where the Sequence of the Sutras adopted in this explanation is the Logical one, in preference to the Textual one. The Pathakrama is mentioned by Anandarigi on Su. 
2.3.15. 
(53) 'The Base and the Suffix conjointly signify principally what the Affix denotes'. A declaration by Shabara on Su. 3.4.13, and also 10.8.24; and also in Tantravārtika on 3.1.12 and 2.1.1. It is found in Mahābhāsya also on Sü. 3.1.67. It has been employ- ed in Nyāyamañjarī (P.403). 
(54) 'Pratinidhinyāya'—'The Law of Substitutes'; dealt with in Mi. Sú. 6.3. 13-17; where the question is discussed as to what can be adopted as a Substitute for what, at a Sacrificial perform- ance; as the rule is that 'whenever the prescribed material is not available, a suitable substitute should be used': Rāmānuja in the 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MĪMĀMSĀ 
383 
Shri-bhagya mentions this Law on p. 508, under Su. 3.3.40; where the Shāṣriraka-bhāṣya mentions it. It is referred to as a maxim of the 'Nyayavidaḥ', in Mahabhāṣya on 1.1. 5-6. 
(55) "The Subsidiary Act has to be repeated with eah Primary Act'. Dealt with in Mi. Sú. 3.1.7. 
(56) 'Perception is more reliable than Inference'. This occurs in Shabara on 3.1.12. This is referred to in Nyāyamañjari (p. 461 and 609); in Nyayakaṇikā, p. 268; and Tatparyaṭika, (p. 27);- cited by Shankara Mishra in his Comment on Vaishëṣika-Sūtra 
3.2.10. 
+ 
(57) 'Even numerous unseen Inferences may have to be assum- ed, if justified by reason." This occurs in Tantravārtika on 2.1.5, Trs., p. 514. It is found also in Sureshvara's Bṛhadāraṇyaka- vārtika, p. 1124 and 1797; also in Chitsukhi (1. 23); and in Khandana (p. 74). 
(58) Even a foolish man does not act without a purpose'. This occurs in Shlokavārtika (p. 653); it is referred to iu Vyāya- mañjarī, p. 191;-also in Nyāyakaṇikā, p. 339. It is quoted in full by Anandagiri on Shārīraka-Bhāṣya 2. 2. 1. 
(59) 'Bhútam bhavyāyopadishyate', 'An accomplihed thing is prescribed for the bringing about of what has to be accomplished'. For instance, the accomplished Sacrificial Act has been prescribed for the bringing about of the Apurva, which is to be accomplish- ed. Found in Tantravārtika on Mi. Su. 2. 1. 5; in Sankṣepa- shārīraka 1.143, where the Commentator quotes this as 'the opinion of Jaimini and Shabarasvamin';-in the same work again on 1.3.12; and in the Tattvadīpana, p. 377. 
(60) The maxim of the man making drawings of the chariot' on the ground;-this is found in Shabara in Mi. Sü. 7.2.15, and again on Su. 9.2.13; where it is explained that the man who makes drawings of the chariot on the ground does so for the purpose of instructing his pupils as to making the chariot go faster in battle-so the Teacher recites the Vedic Text for teaching the pupil, and the Pupil repeats it for getting it up. 
(61) 'Maxim of the lost opportunity'-referred to in Tantra- vārtika 3.5.46, page 1060, as indicating Lost Opportunity. 'What is done after the opportunity for it has lapsed becomes defective'. 
384 
PURVA-MĪMĀMSA IN ITS SOURCES 
(62) Under Mi. Su. 1. 3. 8-9, Jaimini and Shabara have declared that words that are in use among Aryas, have to be taken in the sense in which they are used by them; but those that are used only among Mlechchhas, have to be understood in the sense attributed to them by the latter people. This is quoted by Shankara in his Sharirakabhāṣya on 3. 4. 42. It is used also in Bhămati on 1.3.52; and in Kalpataru, pp. 461-462; Tatparyaṭīkā, p. 292;- Kusumāñjali, Vol. II pages 130 and 154;-and Nyāyamañjarī, p. 288. 
(63) 'When the same fault attaches to both sides of an argu- ment, it cannot be urged against one only'. Shabara on Mi. Sü. 8.3.14;-Nyayakaṇikā, p. 225; Aniruddhavṛtti on Sänkhyasūtra 1.6. See Tantravārtika, p. 947; Nyayamañjarī, p. 95; Tarka- bhāṣā, p. 88. The author of the Khandana (p. 53,) attributes the maxim to Kumārila. 
(64) 'When a man has no Son, toys are not made for his son'; this is said by Shabara in his illustration of Jaimini's Su. 10.3.5; wherein it is declared that 'there could be no injunction of acces- sories for an act which has no accessories at all.' It has been used to illustrate futile activities. 
(65) The maxim of the Rathakára. A Vediv Text lays down that Fire-installation is to be done during the Rains, by the 'Rathakara';-Who is this Rathakara? Is he the man who has adopted chariot-making as a profession? Or is he a man belonging to one of the mixed sub-castes? This question has been discussed in Mi. Su. 6.1. 44-50, where the latter view has been accepted. This maxim has been used by Nagesha in his commentary on Paribhāṣa 98, which declares that the conventional meaning of a word (the sub-caste, Rathakāra, e.g.) is more acceptable than the one indicated by the Etymology of the word (the chariot-maker, e.g.). It has also been used in Nyāyamañjarī, p. 140, 
(66) Rātrisatranyāya. This is presented in Mi. Su. 4. 3. 17— 19; and deals with the Vedic text laying down the Rātrisatra- Sacrifice. There is no result mentioned in the text as to follow from this Sacrifice; and the conclusion is that in all such cases, the result is found in the corresponding Declamatory Texts, Artha- vadas. This has been utilised in the Sharirakabhäşya, on Sũ, 3.3.38; as is clear from Anandagiri, Kalpataru and Parimala; the last work quoting it again under l'édânta Sú. 1.2.24. It is found 
CHAPTER XXXIII: INFLUENCE OF MĪMĀMSĀ 
385 
also in Pañchapädikävivaraṇa, p. 122, and 134;-also in. Tattva- muktākalāpa, V. 81. 
(67) 'Varchonyāya'. The Topic of Glory'. Mi. Sū. 3.8. 25-27 discusses the point whether the using of the Mantra 'Mamāgnē varcho, etc.', brings glory to the Priest who recites it, or to the Master of the Sacrifice; and the latter view is accepted as the correct one. This embodies the principle that the Promoter of an act is the person responsible for it; which, in its variants, has been used in several places. 
(68) The Law of the Tishrrajit-Sacrifice'. The Vishrajit- Sacrifice has been prescribed in a Vedic text which does not men- tion any result obtainable from it; nor is it possible to deduce any result from the Arthavada texts; the conclusion is that in all such cases, the attainment of Heaven should be taken as the Reward; as this is something that is desirable by all men. This has been dealt with in Mi. Sū. 4.3. 10–16; (and also in Sũ. 6.7. 1-20; in a different context); used in Pañchapādīkāvivaraṇa, p. 134, 137 and 164; and in Nyāyamañjarī, p. 524. 
(69) The Reward promised in the Scripture is for the Per- former'. These are words of Mi. Su, 3.7.18. Quoted in Vedanta- tattrarirēka;-in Tatparyaṭīkā, p. 296 and 403, and in Bhamati, p. 28 and 492;—in Shrībhāṣya under 2.3.33 and 3.4.45. 
(70) The meaning of an ambiguous Sentence is to be ascer- tained from what follows in the context'. This is Mi. Sü. 1.4.29. It has been employed in Shārīrakabhāṣya 1.3.14; and also by Anandagiri on 3.3.52; and in Bhumati under Sü. 3.3.34. 
(71) 'So long as a sentence can be taken as one Syntactical Unit, it is not right to split it up'. These are Kumarila's words, in Shlokavārtika (p. 135), in reference to Su. 1.1.4. It has been quoted in Bhamati, under 1.1.28; 1.3.13; 1.4.3; 1.4.16; 3,3,57; and 3.4.20;-by Anandagiri on Sharirakabhāṣya 1.2.15; and Shankara himself says a good deal on this matter under 1.4.3. 
(72) A qualification is admissible only where one is possible, and where in its absence, there is an incongruity'. These are the words of Kumārila (Tantravārtika on 1.3.18 or 24). This law has been quoted in the commentary on Sankṣepashariraka 1.347;-in the Vidyasagari on Khandana, p. 401 and 592. It is found also in the Bṛhadaraṇyakopaniṣad-bhāṣya (6.2.). 
F. 49 
386 
PŪRVA-MĪMĀMSĀ IN ITS SOURCES 
(73) All is right for the powerful'-quoted by Kumarila (in Tantravārtika, p. 134), in answer to the argument against the reliability of the Practices of Good Men. It is found in the Shrimadbhāgavata (10. 33. 30-31); and in the Tatparyaṭika (open- ing part), The same statement is represented in two Dharmasutras of Apastamba, 
(74) The Act prescribed in the various Vedic Texts is one and the same'. That is, for instance, the Agnihotra enjoined in a text of the Madhyandina Shakha is the same as the Agnihotra en- joined in a text of the Kāṇvashākhā. This has been dealt with in Mi. Su. 2.4. 8-32. It is frequently quoted in philosophical works;-in Panchapādikāvivarana, p. 167;-in Nyāyamañjarī, p. 256;-in Vivaraṇapramēyasangraha, p. 169; and in Shri-bhāṣya, 3.3.53. 
(75) 'If a man with eyes is led by some one else, it means that he does not see with his own eyes.' These are the words of Shabara on Mi. Su. 1.2.31. This illustration is quoted in Nyaya- mañjarī, p. 286. 
(76) An Injunction in general terms is always indefinite'. These are the words of Kumarila in Tantravārtika (3.4.47; p. 1020). It has been cited in Padimala (p. 253). This lack of definiteness in general statements is alluded to also by Shabara on Mim. Su. 10.8.16. 
:END: 
-: 
A 
INDEX 
Absence of learning is not a dis- qualification for the Shüdra only, but for all castes, 317 Acharya, 168-70 Achchhāvāka, 288;-Priest, 366 Action forms the subject-matter of the Veda Proper, 246 Acts prohibited in certain parts 
of the country, 233 Aets-classification of-Prabha- 
kara's view, 267; Kumā- rila's view, 267; Ārādupa- kāraka, 267-68: Sannipatyo- pakāraka, 267-68;-its varieties, 267;-Religious- its classification, 268;- grounds of differentiation among, 268-70;-Prin- cipal and auxiliary, 271-74; -classification of auxiliary -, 274;-character of prin- cipal and auxiliary, 292;- auxiliary-means of 
D 
ascer- 
taining what is auxiliary to what, 279-83 
Adhvarvu priest. 288-90; 299; 357:---functions of-364- 
66 
Administration of Law, 372 Adoption of son. 371;---cere- 
mony of, 371;-the child who has been adopted can- not inherit the property of his progenitor father nor can perform his shraddha. 
371-Ruling in the Privy Council, 372 
Adrsta-aiding Nivoga, 360 
Agneva Sacrifice, 282, 303, 337- 
38, 348-49 
Agnidhra priest, 361. 364, 366. Agnihotra, 316, 322-23, 331-34; -primary. 331;-can be performed by three higher 
F.A. 
castes only, 313, 347, 361-62, 386 
Agniṣomiya, 301 
Agnisomiya offering, 344,-sacri- fice, 282, 300-03;-animal sacrifice, 352-54 
Agnistoma sacrifice, 209, 332, 
353;-samstha 
yajña, 363 
Agni Purana, 369 
Agneya sacrifice, 345 
Agnit, 289 
of 
Soma- 
Agnyādhana, 343, 350; 361-62 Agrahāyaṇi which constitutes the 
fire Mahayajñas, 362 
Agrayanesti, 361-62 
Ahavaniya-not for Shudra, 313 Ahina, 363 
Aindragna sacrifice, 328 Aitishayana sage, 308 
Aitihya-a means of cognition, 
165 Aloka-com. on the Chintamani 
by Pakṣadhara Mishra, 23 Altar, 372;-erecting of the- 
351 Amba, 346 
Anubandhya animal, 300 Anubhuti Apprehension, 77 Anvitābhidhana-Vädin, 278 Apastamba-regarding acts pro- hibited in certain parts of the country. 233 Apräptabadha. 342 Aptoryama, 363 
Apurva, 44, 131, 197, 256-64. 271-273. 275-76, 277-279, 
329-30, 334, 336 Arambhaniya Iṣṭi, 353 
Archetype-all the details of- should not be adopted at the Ectype, 341 
Arjuna, 231-32 
Arthavada declamatory 
texts. 
200-206;-classification of. 
20111 
view, 
Arthavada-Prabhakara's 
201-02;-Authority of, 202; --Murari Mishra's view, 202; 
-Trustworthy and 
useful 
character of, 203-204, 385 Ashvamedha, 355 
Ashvayuji-constitutes the Fire 
Mahāyajña, 362 
Aṣṭakās which constitute 
the 
Fire Mahāyajñas, 362;-the performance of, 213;-as the Divinity of Night, 214 Atidesha-Transference 
tails, 328-33 
of De- 
Atirātra, 300, 346, 355, 363;- 
Stoma. 300 
Atom-activity of-and God, 46; 
-vibration in-138 
Attainment of Heaven, 296 Atyagnistoma, 363 
Auxiliary Sciences, 219-20 
Avabhṛtha Bath, 332;-Isti, 360 Avakirni Sacrifice, 326 
Avapa-decentralisation, 
348- 
(Non-apprehension)– 
351 
Abhāva 
Shabara's view, 
161;-Pra- 
bhakara's view, 161-62;- Kumārila's view, 163-64 
Acquiring of wealth and proper- 
ty for different castes. 
-- 
294. 
Acts Primary constituting Dharma, 254-55:-Subsi- diary-constituting Dharma, 254-55:-Kumārila's view, 254-55:-Prabhakara's view. 255:-Prabhakara's view 
criticised. 255:-Primary and subsidiary. 264-66:- Classification of, 266-68: -Kratvartha. 
Purusartha, 267 Adrstasvalaksana. 104 
267-68;--- 
Agama the third se ascribed 
to Grammar. 248 
Aggregate and Prabhakara 64 Ahichchhatra Brahmana. Jadies 
of-addicted to wine. 226 Ajitā, by Paritosha Mishra. a commentary on Tantravär- tika. 22 
INDEX 
All-pervading substances, accord- ing to Prabhakara,-Time, Space, 93 
Amikṣā, 295 
Analogy-not the means of know- 
ing Dharma, 175-76 Anvitābhidhana-Theory 
o f 
verbal expression, 174, 201 Apurva-Difference among-, 
255;-Prabhakara's 
. 
view, 
256-60; Kumārila's view, 261; Nyayamālāvistāra's summary, 262;-four kinds of, 262; To what word is the-related-, 263;-Tran- scendental result, 264 Apurvādhikara, 258 
Arthāpatti 
(Presumption)- 
Arthapatti-Shabara's 157; Prabhakara's 
157-58;-Kumārila's 
158-60 
Arthavada, 50, 215-19 
view, 
view, 
view, 
Asandeha the fifth use ascribed 
to Grammar, 249 
Astakā, 254 
Atom, 93;-and Mimāmsakas, 76 Aviravika Nyāva, 247 
Acts of permanent obligation, 8 Adhikarana-Kaumudi, by Deva- 
natha Thakura, 9 
Adoption of an only son-illegal 
-10 
Aim-final, 6 
Amaru-the son of Shabara, 14 Apurva, 5;-and Dharma, 5 Atmavāda in Shlokavārtika, 8 Atman-Eternal, Imperishable, 
different from the body. sense-organs and Buddhi according to Kumarila, 7; --Omnipresent, 7:--Jñāna- shaktisvabhava-7: Pure consciousness. 7:-Know- ledge of, 7 Atheism, 8 
B 
Bādarayana, 308 
- 
Badha (exclusion), 341-47;- 
kinds of 342-43 
Bath-Final, 167, 300 
INDEX 
Bhāravi's Kirata quoted by 
Bṛhati, 20 
Bhatta System, 20 
Bhartṛmitra-as responsible for making Mimämisă practical. 
24-25 
Bhāvanā, 25,-bringing about, 
198-99;-kinds of, -Arthi, 263-64, 380, 
Bhāvanāviveka, 
Mishra, 22 
198-99; 
2 
by Mandana 
Bhāvārthadhikarana, 263 
Bhisma, 226, 229 
Bhrgu, 307 
Body of God, 49 
Bondage, 50 
Brahman priest, 364-65 
Brāhmaṇa--as the 
- 
source 
and 
V 
means on the duty of other than the three higher castes, 166 Brāhmaṇa-his means of liveli 
hood, 170, study and sacri- fice are compulsory duties of, 170;-to be initiated during the spring, 171;- alone can teach, 166, 170;- alone can investigate, 170;- alone can be the Acharya, 170;-should not behave like the Mlechchha, 247;-is to be sacrificed to Brahmā ir connection with the Ashva- medha, 355 Brahmanachchhamsin, 289, 364, 
366 Brahmasiddhi 
by Mandana 
Mishra, 21 Brahmatattvasamiksā 
on Man- dana's Brahmasiddhi by Vacaspati Mishra I, 21 Brahmic glory-securing of, 355 Brhattika by Kumārila, 21 Buddhist-regarding the science of Buddha, scriptures eternality 242:-Nihilism 
omni- 
50;- 
of, 
(Shunya- 
• 
vāda), 55 
Bādaryadhikarana, 258 Bhagavadgita, 32, 36 Bhakṣānuvāka, 280 Body-according 
kara, 
to 
111 
Prabha- 
40;-Kumārila's 
view, 40; Vegetable-, 
40 
Brahmana 
text, 195;-defined, 195;-characteristic features of-given by the Vṛttikara -, 195;-ten kinds of- 195-96;-classification under 
five heads, classification heads, 197 
196;-another under three 
Brahman, 289-90; 299. 
Badarayana's Brahmasütra-5 Bhartrhari--the son of Shabara, 
14 
Bhartṛmitra-Earliest 
commen- 
tator on Jaimini Sutra, 13 Bhattachandrikā, by Bhaskara 
Bhatta, 11 Bhättanayaḥ, 5 
Bhavadasa, commentator on Jai- 
mini Sutra, 13 Bhavanatha Mishra, author of 
Nayaviveka, 20 Brahman-Knowledge of, 9 Brhati, by Prabhakara, 17-18;- 
style similar to that of Shabara's Bhasya, 18; avail- able up to Adhyāya 6 only, 19 
Cake Baking of the, 345;-Meat 
--offering, 352 
Capacity for performance of 
sacrifice, 323 
Case of Shri Balasu Guru Linga Svami, 372;-of Shri Bal- wan Ramalakṣamina, 372;- of Radhamohan, 372;-Har- dei Bibi, 372; cases of con- flict, 283 
Chanaka, 324, 368 Chandra-a writer on Pürva Mīmāmsā of the Prabhā- 
kara school, 184 
1V 
Chhandogya 
Brāhmaṇas-Study 
of the Sutras of Gautama and Gobhila, 214, 244 Chhandah-Sutra of Pingala, 188 Charu offering, 342 Chaturhotra Homa, 326 
Chāturmãsya, 
369-70 
362,-sacrifice, 
Chaitri which constitutes the Fire 
Mahāyajña, 362 
Chitradhara Mishra, a great Mi- 
māsaka, 13 
Chitra sacrifice, 208, 301 
Chodana-means 
Dharma, 174 
of 
knowing 
Cognition of cognition, 54;-and its validity, Prabhakara's view. 77-84. Kumārila's view. 84-88; Murāri Mishra's view. 88;-means 
of, 26 Cognition-modification of soul, means of;- 
86; other 
Kumarila's view, 164-65;- wrong, 56 
Compulsory Duties, 293 Conflict between Smrti 
and 
Usage, 35-36;-cases of- between Veda and Smṛti, 220;-Prabhakara's view, 220, Kumārila's view, 221- 22: Murari's view, 222;- -Shabara's view, 223 Constituent or material cause, 92 Context more authoritative than 
the order of sequence, 286 Contingent Acts, 322 Custom as the source of know- ledge of Dharma, 211;- authority of, Extent sphere of the 242-43, 335- 36 
and 
Cups dedicated to Deities, 345 Curd to be offered at a sacrifice, 
293 
Daiva Acts, 327 Dākṣāyaṇa, 362 
D 
Daksina-sacrificial fee, 364-66 
INDEX 
Darkness and Prabhākara, 65 Darsha pūrṇamāsa, 223, 262, 265, 267-68; 272, 281-86, 289, 293, 297, 299, 301, 303, 310, 319, 322-23, 325, 328-31 348-50, 353, 357, 361-63, 369, 376, 
Darsha sacrifice, 343, 355 Debts to Pitrs, 322-23 
Declamatory Vedic Texts, 254 Declaration, 328;-kinds of, 328; 
Direct, 330 
Deity-Female-Offering to the, 301;-of the sacrifice, 337; -feeding of the, 335, 337; -not entitled to perform sacrifices, 307;-Title or capacity of--to Brahma- jñāna, 308;-to whom the sacrifice is offered is a pure- ly hypothetical entity, 361; --is subordinate to sacrifice, 360;--has no physical body, 
360 
Denotative relation according to 
Prabhakara, 129 
Denotative potency of 
of word- Prabhakara's view, 129 Devanatha Thakkura, 354 Devata Conception of-at sacri- 
fices, 335 Devatadhikarana, 258 Dharma-means of 
knowing, 173-74; 251, 254:-and Vedic Injunction, 175-76;- Enquiry into the nature of, 167, 172-73;-Acts consti- tuting, 254-55;-True character of, 254;-is the subject-matter of Purva Mimämsä, 359;-stands for what the man should do, 359;-in common usage, it includes such acts as Yaga, Homa, Däna, Snäna, Dhyana, Japa, 359-60;- Principal forms of-for Mi- mamsa are Yäga, Dana and Homa, 360 
Dikṣanīvā Iṣṭi, 344;-Recitation, 
344 
Direct apprehendedness and aparoksya and pratyakṣată of the external objects, 60 Domestic fire, 363 
Dream Cognitions, 53, 56, 83 Dulă, 346 
Deity Investigation 
Nature of, 212 
of the 
Dvadashaha sacrifice, 325, 363 Dhṛtarastra, 225-26, 230 
Divinity of Night, 213-14 Draupadi, 230-31 Drstasvalakṣana, 104 
Dharma and ordinary Pramanas, 4-5;-duty of man, 8;-idea of, 9;-active aspect of, 
18 Děvanatha Thakura, author 
Adhikarana-Kaumudi, 9 
Deliverance, final, 8 
Devaswami-commentator 
Sankarsana-Kända, 12-13 
Dvadashalaksani, 13 
Easterners, 243 
E 
of 
o n 
Ekadashādyadhikarana by Murāri 
Mishra, 23 
Ekāha--modification of the Jyo- 
tiştoma, 363 
Embellishments, 296, 300 
Expiatory Rites, 354-361 
Extraction-day. 
ing-, 300 
300-01:-Morn- 
Engaging the services of the 
priests, 291 
Entity everlasting, 8 
F 
False coin-as the sacrificial fee, 
315 
Fasting, 291 
Fire-consecration of-, 356 Fire-Installation, 304, 313, 324, 
326, 362, 371 Fire-Mahayajñas. 
tute the Archetype of the group, 362 
262;--consti- 
INDEX 
G 
Gadadhara Bhattacharya, 201 Garhapatya fire, 280, 294, 379 Garlic Eating of prohibited in 
the Veda, 320-21 
Gautama, 10, 137;-Smrti, 243; -Sutra, 243;-followed by Samavedins, 244 
Gifts of a mare or a slave girl 
or a cow, 319; 358 
Goat--the animal of sacrifice, 327 Gotra, 307;-Rsi, 316 Grammar--cannot be regarded as a Shastra, 246, Proceeds en- tirely on the basis of usage, 246;-Science of---cannot derive its authority from the Veda, 246;-is not found to serve any useful purpose in matters relating to Dharma, 246-47;-the knowledge of- is Dharma, 249,-usefulness of-249; Science of-250; -six elements of-251;- --the use of, 248-251;- Elements of, 251 
Grammatical Smrti, 244;-Pra- 
bhakara's view, 
Bhasya's view, 245 
244-45; 
Grävastut, 288-89, 364, 366 Gambling, 286-87 
God-according to Shabara, 43; 
Prabhakara's view, 44-47; -Kumarila's view, 47-52; -as world creator, denied by Kumarila, 51; his place in Yoga, 4;-and Samadhi, 4 
Grhyasutra-localised 
or uni- 
versal authority of, 243-44 Govinda, the son of Shesa, 16;- 
Pupil of Madhusudana Saras- wati, 16 
Gurugitä on six systems, 2 
H 
Happiness. 292-95, 306;-and 
Final Deliverance, 7 Havirdhana, 343, 354, 377 
Haviryajñas consist of-361;- 
363 Heaven, 67, 305-06; 323, 337, 348, 357;-pleasures of, 297 Hell, 321 
Hinduism is a religion of sacri- fices in the highest sense of the term, 359 
His, 357 
Holakadhikarana, 242 Holākā, 243, 254 
Homa-Receptacle of the offer- ing, not necessarily fire. It may be water, 360 
Hotr Priest, 343, 288-90, 364-65 Hetvabhasa-fallacious 
reason- 
Prabhakara's view, 102-03: 
Kumarila's view, 108 
History of families in the Purāṇas 
-object of, 216 Hari-Commentator on Jaimini 
Sutra, 13 
Haribhadra Suri-regarding six 
systems, 2 
Harichandra-the great Vaidya, the son of Shabara, 14 Highest good consists of, 7 Highest Truth, 11 
INDEX 
Inherent Expressive. Potency of word-Prabhakara's 
the 
view, 130 
Inheritance--widow's rights of, 
368 
Instigator of the Act, 288 
Initiation of the sacrificer and his wife with the Mekhalā and the Yoktra, respectively, 318 
Initiation, 322, 325 Intuitional cognition, 99 Invocation of Blessings, 358 Işli, 303-04;-consists of, 361;- Priests engaged in, 361;-the Prakrti or Archetype of the -is the composite of Darsha- purnamasa sacrifice, 361;- Samsthās of-361; six Vikṛtis or Ectypes of-361- 62;-Archetypes of-362 Isu sacrifice, 328-29; 331 Itihasa and Purana-Kumārila's 215-16;-common 
view, 
features with Smrti, 217 Injunctive process, 197 
C 
Inferential Cognition-the object 
of-, 104 
I 
Idealist-Buddhist, 54-56;- View of regarding external object, 60-criticised by Kumārila, 60; 80 
Idealism-the doctrines of-219 Illusory Reality, 59;-Cognition, 
69 
Immaterial Cause, 92-93 
Indra and Ahalyā, 225, 228-29;- Indra, 335-37;-Master of Heaven, 336 
Inference-not the means 
knowing Dharma, 
Shabara's view, 
of 
175-76; 
100;-Pra- 
bhakara's view, 101-106;- Kumärila's view, 106-09;- varieties of, 105;-factors of, 105 
J 
Pra- 
Jāti identical with Akṛti, 68- Shabara's view, 68-69;- Prabhakara's view, 69-72; Buddhist view, 69-70; bhakara's criticism of the Buddhist view, 70-71;- Kumarila's view, 72-76;- is illusory, 70;-is real en- tity not apart from Indivi- duals, 70; has its real exis- tence apart from Individuals 70:-different and non- different from Individuals, 70 
Juhu, 296, 319 
Jyotistoma, 310, 314, 327, 345, 347, 354, 357:-is the Arche- type of Somayaiñas, 278 280, 291, 300, 363, 365 
Jayanta Bhatta, author of Nyaya. mañjarī on Sat-tarki, 2 Jaimini Sūtra-the earliest work, 
11 
Jinadatta Süri, on six systems, 2 Jñana-attainment of, 8 
K 
Kalpasūtras and Kalpa-distinc- tion between, 239-40;- Authorities of, 239-42; -in conflict with the Veda, 241; 319 
Kamesti sacrifice, 364 Kanāda, .137 
Karka the commentator, 317-18, 
362 
Karma, 49-50;-and Prabhakara, 
62-63 
Käshika by Sucharita Mishra on 
Shlokavārtika, 22, 25 
Katyayana Shrautasutra, 315, 317 Kavindracharya, 20 Kodrava corn, 368 Kratvartha, 292--96, 355 Krsna-dvaipayana, 225, 229 Krsna, 231-33 
Krttikäs, 346 Kulayavajña, 319 
Kumārila-author of the Mānava Kalpasútra, 21;-His date 600-660 A.D. Krsna-Yajurvedins 
and 
study the Smrtis of Āpastamba Baudhayana, 214-15; 244 Kṣattriya to be initiated during 
the summer, 172 
Kumārila's system, 20 Kusha seat for the cake, 285 
L 
Laghu-the fourth use attributed 
to Grammar, 249 
Law of substitutes, 382 Laws of the Hindus are based on 
scriptural texts, 359 Laws of Grammar, 248, 251 
INDEX 
vii 
Law-domain of, 10 Liberation-Final-Nature of, 6 Liberation or Moksa of Soul, 36 -39; according to Prabhā- kara, 36-37; according to Kumārila, 37-39; Valla- bhacharya's view, 37;-Tri- dandi's view, 37;-Shankara- charya's view, 37; Lila- vati's view, 37 
Linga (Indicative word)--means 
of Interpretation, 248 
M 
Madhyama, 249 Madhyamika Buddhists, 59 Mahāyajñas-necessary for house- 
holders, 170 
Maitra Varuna, 288-90;-Priest, 
366 
Man alone should not perform sacrifices, 310;-should be associated with the woman who is his patni in the sacrifice, 310-11 
Mantra and Brahmana, 178: 
defined, 179;-Instruments of offering, 179;-a name applied to those Vedic texts that are expressive of mere Assertion as distinguished from Injunction. 179:- Prabhakara's definition, 180; -classified, 180-81, 184, 187-88: distinguished from the Brahmana, 180;-not Injunctive, 181:-Kumārila's view. 181-182;-Prabha- kara's view. 182-83:- Murari Mishra's view, 183; -characteristic features of, 
187 
Manu regarding the duty of man, 
211; Smrti. 243 
Mänava Kalpa Sutra, by Kumā- 
rila, 21 
Marriage Arsa form of. 539;- purely a religious function, 310 
Vill 
Mășa Corn, 324, 368 Mäsägnihotra, 331, 361-62. Master of the House, 299;-of the 
sacrifice, 289, 291 
Maxims of Mimänsä, 372;-- quoted by Shankaracharya, 373;-Handbook of-by Colonel Jacob, 373-386 Means of Interpretation-the six, 
248 
Means of Right Cognition-six- 
343;-Valid, 344 
Mekhalā, 318 
Metres the Principal-188 Milking vessels, 294 Mimämsänukramanika, by Man- 
dana Mishra, 21 Mimämsä-the science of-part- ly based on Veda, partly on ordinary experience, and partly on Perception, Infer- ence, etc., 219;-Study- cause of the neglect of the- 367 
Mīmāmsā Rules of Interpreta- 
tion, by K. L. Sarkar, 372 Mind, according to Prabhakara, 40,-Kumārila's view, 41-42 Mishra-Mata-Third School, 23 Mitäkṣarā, 369-70 Moksa, 308 
Moral Code, 242 
Motive, 292 
Mudgacaru. 368 
Murarestṛtiyaḥ 
Panthah, 
by 
INDEX 
Means of verbal cognition accord- ing to Prabhakara, 128 Methods of studying 
topics, 167-68 
Mahānirvana Tantra, 1 
Mīmāmsā 
Mallinatha's son on six systems, 
2 
Mandana Mishra, 14;-Pupil of Kumārila (which is not un- likely), 19 
Manusmrti, 14 
Matter, meaning of-, 3 Means of knowledge as the start- ing point of the philoso- phical works, 3 
Mimämsä, meaning of, 3;-Re- liable Word or Revelation. 3;-not different from Vedanta, 4;-Purva and Ustara, 4-5;-a philoso. phical system or not, 4-5;- Differences between Purva and Uttara-; 5;-Proper. 5;-Inter-relation 
and Inter-dependence, 6-7;-as Shastra mukha, 6;- as Prathamatantra, 6;- two, as Krtsnashästra, 6;- special field occupied by Proper: 9:-Grantha Pra- kasha Samiti, 13 
Mitaksarā. quotes Prabhakara, 18 Murari Mishra-the founder of 
the third school of Purva- Mimamsa, 15;-Kumārila's 
pupil, 15 
Umesha Mishra, 23, 89 
Murari Mishras-Five-23 
Murari Mishra's view on certain topics of Purva-Mimaisā, 
by Dr. Umesha Mishra, 23- 24; 26 Madhyamatikā, 
by Kumārila 
21 Mandana Mishra-Date, 615- 695 A.D.: the earliest expo- nent of Bhatta system, 21;- wrote a commentary on the Tantravārtika, 21;-wrote also Vidhiviveka, Mimäm- sānukramanikä, 21 and Brahmasiddhi, 21 
N 
Nahusa as Indra, 225, 229 Naksatra Martra. 354 
Naksatresti, 345-46 
Nāmadheva-Proper Names, 206 
-10;-Prabhakara's 
207 
Närista Homas, 346 
view. 
Negative term-meaning of the, 
346-47 
Neo-Mimāmsakas Madhava- 
charya, 316 
Nestr, 366, 288-90 
INDEX 
ix 
Nibandhana, 357 
Nibandha or Nibandhana an- other name of the Brhati, 20 Nigada, 186, 344 Nirvikalpaka, 95, 99 Niṣādasthapati entitled to per- form certain sacrifices, 314; -should perform the Rau- dra sacrifice, 315; 318 Nisada is a mixed caste, 315;-is 
devoid of Vedic 
ing, 315 
Niṣāda Chief, 371 
Niskāsa, 344 
Nivära Corn, 338-39 Niyamabidhi, 276 
learn- 
Niyoga (mandatory force), 257- 
60, 273 
Niyojana, 300 
Nyayas of Mîmāmsā, 372, 373, 374, 376-84, 378; 379, 384 Nyaya view regarding God, 
4446 
Nyaya Kaustubha, 88 Nyayaparayana on the 
Tantra- 
vārtika, by Gangadhara 
Mishra, 22 
Nyayakanika on Vidhiviveka, by Vacaspati Mishra I, 22 
Nyāyaratnākara, by Pārtha- 
sarathi Mishra, 25 ." 
Nyayaratnamālā, 
by 
sarathi Mishra, 22 
о 
Observances, 321 
Offering has been defined as-the setting aside of one's own ownership over the thing offered and the bringing about of the ownership of another person--the receipt of the gift, 360;-brings about a connection between substance and a deity, 360 Order of Sequence, 298-03;— means by which this-is de- termined. 298-302;-con- flict among the means, 301 Order of Commencement, 300 Order determined by the Prin- 
cipal, 301-302 
Order of Place-more authori- 
tative than Name, 287 
P 
Pakayajñas, 362;-the 
Samsthas of, 362-63 
Seven 
Pakṣadhara Mishra, 88-89 
Pañchadasharatra sacrifice, 344 Pancharatra, 222 
Pandavas, 230-31 
Parā, 249 
Partha- 
Nyavasudha, by Someshvara, 21 
Nvävasútra, 68 
Nästikya in Indian Philosophy- 
its meaning, 5 
Nayaviveka, 
by Bhavanatha 
on 
Mishra, a commentary Jaimini Sutra, after Pra- bhakara, 20 
Non-Vaidika Dharma, 7 Nyaya-Principles, 9;-their due influence on other matters, 10 Nyaya "stands for, 3:-and Vai- 
shesika their relation. 4 Nyaya Vaishēsika on matter and 
spirit, 11 Nyayaratnakara, by Parthasarathi 
Mishra, 7 
Parasharamadhava, 170 
of 
Parthasarathi Mishra, author 
न्यायर लाकर on श्लोकवार्त्तिक; शास्त्र- दीपिका तन्त्ररल on Tupṭīkā; 
न्यायरत्नमाला 
Partition, 367 
Pārvana Shraddha which consti- 
tutes the 
362 
Parvukti, 292 
Fire-mahāyajñas, 
Pashubandha, 362 
Payovrata sacrifice. 277, 363 Perception-Savikalpaka Pra- 
bhakara's view. 96-97: Kumārila's view. 99:-of the Mystic. 99;-Intuitional (Pratibhā), 99:--more reli- able than Inference. 383:--- of Yoga. 39;-simple (Alo- cana), 99 
F. B. 
X 
Perpetual Flux-the doctrine of 
-219, 242 
Personal world creator, 52 Petitio Principii, 107 Pitrya Acts, 327 
Potr, 289-90;-Priest, 364, 366 Prabhakara-author of Brhati- 
date, 610-690 A.D. Prabhakara-Vijaya, 20 
Practices of good men-authori- tative character of, 224- 27;-Kumārila's view, 225- 27;-limited to those 
in- habiting Aryavarta, 227;- are based on Veda, 233 Prajapati and Uṣā, 225, 228 Prajapatya sacrifice, 339 Prakarana (context), 248 
Prakarana pañcikā, 
by Shalika. 
natha Mishra, 20 
Prakṛti (Archetype), 329-30 Pramana, 77-89 
Prameyapahāra, 342 
Prapta Badha, 342-43 
Prasanga (extended application), 
352-58 
Prastotr Priest, 288, 364 Prātaranuvāka, 288 
Pratibha a means of Cognition- not always reliable, 165 Pratihartṛ, 288-89;-priest. .343. 
364, 366 Pratikarsa, 345 
Pratipasthatṛ priest, 288-89. 364 Pratipattikarma, 296 Pravara Rsis, 316-17 Prayājas, 272, 
293;-offerings, 
329, 349, 352;-Samid, 370 Priest-Hotr, Adhvaryu, Udgātṛ, 283, 288-paying the fees to-, 288;-Rtviks, 288: the number of Priests, 288- 90:-Duties of. 290:-Ap- pointment of, 346 Principle of Syntactical 
(Ekaväkyädhikarana), 189- 
91 
Unit- 
Principle of Syntactical Split (Vakyabheda), 191-93 
Principle of Elliptical Extension 
(Anuṣanga), 193 
INDEX 
Principles of Interpretation, 367 Principle-Priority of mention leads to priority in action, 370 
Privy Council, 372 
Prohibitions exact signification, 
320 
Property, 369 
Prospective sacrifices, 303, 316, 
323 
Pupil should salute the teacher when he happens to meet him, 322 
Puranic descriptions--object of 
216 
Prstha signifies Rgveda, 186-87 Puroḍāsha, 287 
Puronuvāka, 288, 290 
Puruṣārtha, 39;. Acts, 292-97 
355-options-355; kinds. of, 355 
Pashyanti form of speech, 249 Perception (valid cognition)- Shabara's view, 90-92;- Prabhakara's view, 92-98; -Kumārila's view, 98;- Non-conceptual-of Bhatta- denied by Prabhakara, 95 Pratihāra chant, 288 Prayogashastra, 242 Presumption not the means of knowing Dharma, 175-76 Parama Puruşartha its attain- 
ment Kumārila's view, 7 Prabhakara Mishra, the earliest commentator on the Shabara Bhāṣya, 15; Guru, 17;- Kumarila's pupil, 15-16;-- Date about 600-650;- Senior to Kumārila, 17-19 Privy Council Judgment, 10 Pārthasarathi Mishra, author of Nvävaratnākara and Shastra- dipikā, 13 
Patanjali, 18 
Q 
Qualities and Prabḥākara, 64 
R 
Rājasuya sacrifice distinctly en- joined for the Rājā only, 244, 286-87, 363 
Rāma, 229 
Rāṇaka, by Someshwara Bhatt, 
22 
Răstrabhṛt 
363 
(minor 
sacrifice), 
Rathakära, 318, 371, 384;-en- titled to perform certain sacrifices, 314;-are the in- ferior Saudhanvans, 315; is one whose mother is born of a Shudra mother and a Vaishya father, 315;-fire installation for the purpose of purification, 315 Ratrisatira sacrifice, 296 Raudra sacrifice, 315 
Reality of external world--- Shabara's view, 53-55;- Prabhakara's view, 55-58; -Kumārila's view, 58-60 Religious student, 322 Reputation for Respectability, 
296 
Rk defined, 184;-should be re-. 
cited loudly, 281 
Rgveda comes from Agni, 
281 
Rgvedins study the Sutras of 
Vashistha, 214 
Rights Equal-is a moot ques- 
tion, 309 Rsis-debts to, 322 Rajashekhara Suri on six sys- 
tems, 2 
Rajashekhara's 
E 
Kāvyamīmāṁsā 
regarding Vanmaya, 2 
Rāmakrsna, 9 
Rama Mishra Shastri regarding 
Sankarṣaṇa Kanḍa, 12 
between two 
Reconciliation 
schools, 8 
Revealed word, 9;-infallible guide in knowing Dharma, 
11 
Rjuvimala on Brhati, by Shali. kanatha Mishra 18, 20 
INDEX 
S 
X1 
Sacrifices, 350,-Qualifications of the performer, 305;-means of-, 305;-Deities not en- titled to the performance of -, 307;-Sages are not en- titled to the performance of, 307;-whether women and Shudra should perform or not, 308;-Disqualifica- tion for performers of-, 316;-Rākṣasas and Pisha- chas cannot perform, 317;- Animals cannot offer-317; 
-are not performed by one or more limbs wanting- 317;-not performed by one who is sexless and who is a Shudra-317;is a form of worship of the deity -335;--Extent and scope of 348;-subsidiary—, 348, 350;-Prospective, 349;- formed the most important factor in the life of the Hindu, 359: 359-63;- classification of-, 361-63; ---Primary or Principal-, 
301 
Sacrificial Acts, 295, 305-06;– 
order of sequence of, 305; 320; 334, 343 
Sacrificial sessions, 363 Sacrificing Householder, 287 Sacrificer-No substitute for the 
- 324;-Initiated, 347;- wearing of gold by the-, 368-69 
Sacrificial rituals-disappearance of is the cause of the neg. lect of Purva-Mimārsā, 9 Sad-darshana-Misnomer, 
1;- 
not known in ancient times, 1;-various views regarding the constituents of, 1-3 Shalikanätha Mishra. 15:- direct pupil (which is doubt- ful) of Prabhakara, 20 Samadhi and God. 4 Sankarṣaṇa Kāṇda, 11-12X11 
Sankhya, the subject-matter of—, 3;-with God and without God, 4; and Yoga-their difference, 4;-teaches the first essential distinction be- tween matter and spirit, 11; -Kārikā quoted, 11 Sadyaskara sacrifice, 300-01 Sages have no Gotra, 307 Samakhya (Name), 248 
Saman-defined, 184-85;-divid 
ed-, 185;-not a 
Mantra, 
185;-Bṛhat and Rathantara 338; Kanvarathantara, 
338; 345 
Samavaya and Prabhakara, 63 Samavedana, 80 
Sambhara Mantra, 355 
Samidheni, 319;-Verses, 343; 
-If the sacrificer 
happens 
to be a Vaishya-should be seventeen 343, 361 
Samit sacrifices, 278, 281-82 Samvatsara Yaga, 319 
Samvedya and Prameya according 
to Prabhakara, 58 
Samvit (Objective Idealism), 56; -Prabhakara's view, 57-58 
Sanctificatory Acts, 296 
Sankalpa, 288 
Sänkhya, 222 
Sankhya view regarding creation, 
49 
Sānnayya vessel, 287 
Sapinda, 357 
Sarasvati Isti, 247; 319 
Sarasvata, 301 
Sarvasiddhanta-Sangraha, 52 Sarvasiddhantarahasya—a 
Pra- 
ac- 
bhakara school work, 64-65 Satta-Summum genus-not 
cepted by Prabhakara, 72 Sattra-Communistic sacrifices, 318-20;-differs from the ordinary sacrifices, 318;- Priests at, 319;-If one of the sacrificers happened to die at, 319;-conditions for the performance of, 319; -There are to be at least seventeen sacrificers, 319. 
INDEX 
and 
20; 324;-Kşattriya Vaishya cannot perform-, 319; 363 
Saurya sacrifice, 331, 338 Sautrāmani, 363 
Savaniya animal, 300-301 Science of Reasoning, 219 Scripture of action, 242 Scriptural Act of Sacrifice, 294 Self-satisfaction (conscience) 
as 
the source of the knowledge of Dharma, 211, 228 Self-validity of Cognition-key- 
stone of Mimāsā, 79-80 
Sense organs Prabhakara's view, 40;-Kumārila's view, 40-42 Sense-Cognition, 54 
Sense-Perception, not the means 
of knowing Dharma, 175-76 Sentence and its meaning- 
Shabara's view, 123-25;- 
Prabhakara's view, 135-39; ---Kumārila's view, 151-153 Shakamedha, 362 
Shākamedhiya, 370 
Shakti and Prabhäkara, 62 
Shakuntala of Kalidasa, 21 Shaktivada by Gadadhara, 201 
Shakya, 222 
Shankara Bhatta, 345 
Shankaracharya, 308 
Share-mother should receive 
equal-if the partition 
is 
effected after the father's death, 369 
P 
Shastra the title of Grammar, 
251 
Shaving of the head, 291;- 
should be done by the hus- band alone, 311 
363 
Sheṣa (Auxiliary), 265 Shlokavārtika, 21 Shrauta padarthanirvachana, Shravani (which constitutes the 
Fire Mahāyajñas), 362 Shruti-means of Interpretation 
(direct assertion), 248 Shudra-entitled to perform sacrifices discussed, 308, 313 -14-not to perform sacri 
{ 
INDEX 
fices at all, 313; cannot perform the Agnihotra, 313; -unfit for performing sacri- fices, 314;-not initiated in- to the Vedic study, 314;- will not read the Vedas, 314; --not entitled to perform sacrifices according to Shan- kara Vedanta also, 314 No can be acquired legally as property against his will, 326;-special sacrifices laid down for the-, 371;-not entitled to the performance of Vedic rites, 371 Shyena sacrifice, 290-91, 328- 
31,343 
Similarity and Prabhakara, 61- 
62 
Six subsidiaries (sciences), 246 Slave girl a gift, 319 Smrti (Remembrance), 77 Smrti-as the source of the know- 
ledge of Dharma, 211;- Prabhakara's view, 212;-- Trustworthy nature of-, 212 Smrti-Authority of-Prabhā- 
kara's view, 213; Connota... tion of the term-214;— Proper enumerated, 214;- applicable throughout Arya- varta, 214; Kumarila's view, 214; Trustworthy nature of -Prabhakara's view, 218-- 20;-Proper-those constitute the Dharma- shästra,, 216-17-common features with Purana and Itihasa, 217;-of the Bud- dha, 242 Sodashin vessels, 268; 346, 355; 
363 
which 
Soma juice, 332-33;-Sacrifice, 
280, 289; 303-304, 322 Somayajñas, 363;-Archetype is the Jyotistoma (loosely known as 'श्रग्निष्टोम ) 363: -Seven Samsthas of this class, 363 
"Someshvara Bhatta, 
Nyāyasudha, 21 
" 
author of 
A 
xili 
Soul (Atman)-Shabara's view, 26-28; Prabhakara's view, 28-32; Kumārila's view, 32-35 Southerners, 243 
Sphota-Doctrine of-112-13 Sthana (order of sequence), 248 Sthapati Isti, 326 Studentship, 322 Subodhini on 
Tantravārtika, by 
Annam Bhatta, 22 
Subrahmanya, 
364, 366 
288-89;-Priest, 
Subsidiary sciences, 241 
Substance and Prabhakara, 63- 
64. Sūktāvāka, 285 
Sunasiriya (Vikrti of Isti), 362, 
370 
Superhuman performers, 326 Super Soul, 51-52 
Sutramani (Vikrti of Isti), 362 Svaprakasha, 88 Svarga, 306 
Syntactical Unit, 385 
Sambhava--means of Cognition, 
1 
* 164 
Speech-four kinds of, 249 Svalakṣaṇa-Buddhist 
view- 
denied by Prabhakara, 95 
Sankṣe pashariraka supports Pra- 
bhakara's priority 
ㄓ 
Kumārila, 19 
Sarvajñātma Muni-pupil 
to 
o f 
Sureshvaracharya and the 
author of Sankṣepashārī- raka, 19 
Sarvasiddhāhtasangraha, 
Shesa, 16 
b.y 
Self-knowledge-two kinds of—, 
7-8 
Shabara Swāmi, author of Bhāṣya 
on Jaimini Sutra, 6;---con temporary of Vikramaditya of about 57 B.C., 13-14;- Father of Vikramaditya, 14; -Guru of Vikramaditya, 14 Shantiraksita-Buddhist writer 
of the 8th century A.D., 16 Shariraka Bhāṣya, by Shankara, 
6, 8 
XIV 
Shaunaka on the adoption of an 
only son-10-11 
Shalikanatha Mishra, 15 
Shri Bhasya of Rāmānuja, 12 
Siddhanta Bhasya 
Kāṇḍa), 13 
(Sankarṣaṇa 
Soul, in Mimänsä, 5;-detailed investigation regarding-in the Vedanta, 5;-and Kumā. rila, 5; Nature of, 6;- Existence of. 6:-as distinct from the body, 6;-as the enjoyer of the results and acts, 6. 
Spirit-meaning of, 3 
Style of Kumārila and Prabha- 
kara, 18 
Sucharita Mishra-author 
Kashikā, 13 
of 
Sureshwara and Mandana-(Equ 
ation doubtful), 19;-date 6th century A.D., 19 
emu- 
Systems of Philosophy only 
three, 3; their pairs. merated, 4;-theoretical and practical, 4, 11 
INDEX 
and Vaisheṣika, 61-62;- Kumarila's view, 66 
Time is beginningless, 307 Tonsure, 357 Traiyambaka, 362 Transference, 
331-33;-of details, 331;-by pre- sumed Injunction, 332;- of Injunction, 332;-of sub- stratum, 332;-of substitutes, 332 Tridandin and liberation, 37 Trikändamandana, 356 Trikanḍimimam samaṇḍana- also known as Rānaka and Nyāyasudha on Tantravär- tika, by Someshwara Bhaṭṭa, 
22 
Tripädinitinayanam, by Murāri 
Mishra, 23 
Triputi Pratyakṣavādu, 92 Tuptikā, 21 
Turiya-stage-fourth, the High- 
est stage of 
31 
by 
consciousness, 
Parthasarathi 
T 
Taittiriya Brahmana, 303 Tantra (centralisation), 348-52 Tantrachudamani, by Krsnadeva, 
21 
Own 
Tantravārtika, 21, also known as Tantrațikā, 21;-is a sum- mary of the author's Brhattikā, 21 Tanunapat, 370;-sacrifice, 281-* 
82, 299 
Tattvasangraha, by Shantirakṣita 
on Jāti, 70 Tautātimatatilaka vārtika, by deva alias 
Bhujanga, 22 
on Tantra- Bhatta Bhava- Balabalabhi 
Teachers trustworthy 
of the, 242 
view, 
view, 
character 
Things of the world-Shabara's 
61;-Prabhakara's 
61-65;-Prabhakara 
Tantraratna; 
Mishra on Tupṭīkā, 22 
Taksashila, .14 
Tattvasangraha, by Shantirakṣita, 
16 
U 
Udgätṛ, 288-91: 343. 364-65 Üha (conjectural modification) 248; 33440;-kinds of, 338-39 
Ukthya (Samsthā of Somayajña), 
363 
Umbeka Bhatta identified with Mandana Mishra or Bhava- bhūti. wrote a commentary on the Tantravārtika; also 
wrote a commentary Shlokavārtika, 22 
Unnetṛ, 288-89, 364-66 Unseen force, 138 
on 
Upamana-Analógical Cognition, 
Shabara's view, 
A 
154; Pra 
bhakata's view, 154-55;-- Kumarile's view, 156 
Upāmshu sacrifice, 282-83, 
02 
Upanayana, 168-69;-fire, 
322; 326, 357 
Upavarṣa-the 
Vrttikāra 
INDEX 
301. 
316; 
of 
Purva-Mimämsä, 6, 13, 14. 
112 
Org, 357 
Uttaravědi, 370 Upakarana, 300 
Udyotakara, author of the Nyāya- 
vārtika, 16 Upāsanā Kāṇḍa, 12 
Y. 
Vādivinoda, by Shankara Mishra, 
37 
Vaikhari, 249 
Vdishesika view regarding the 
organ of hearing, 42 Vaishvadeva, 362, 370 Vaishvanara sacrifice, 297 Vaishya to be initiated during 
the Autumn, 172 Vaishyastoma sacrifice, 338 Vajapeya sacrifice, 339, 363 Vāja prasaviya (minor sacrifice), 
363 Vājasaneyins-follow 
Shankha 
and Likhita Smrti, 244; 354 Vajina, 295 
Vakya (syntactical connection)- 
means of Interpretation- 248 
Validity of Cognitions-24 Vallabhacharya and liberation, 
37 
Varana, 288 
Vardhamana on 
Kusumāñjali, 
23;-on Nyavalilavati. 24; -on Tattvachintamani, 24 
Värtraghni Mantra, 356 
Varuna, 335 
Varuna praghasa sacrifice, 
sacrifice, 332. 
344, 357, 362, 370 
Vasana and Prabhakara, 58-59 
Vasat, 298 
Vasistha and suicide. 225, 229 Vata seeds, 332 
XV 
Veda eternal, 50,-not the work 
of a personal being, 127;- Shabara's view, bhakara's view, 
127;-Pra- 
139;-eter- 
nality and self-sufficiency of the, 131;-only source and means of knowledge which can provide one with the right knowledge of duty, 166, 174;-study of reserved for the three higher castes, 166; -study of--is a Dharma, 166, 171;-is the only means of Dharma, 177;---Reliabi- 
lity of the 174-78;- Reliability and validity of, 177; not the work of a personal author, 178;-Ex- tent and content of, 179;- Reliable means of knowing Dharma, 178-79;-four parts of-, 206; sole authority in matters relating to Dharma, 211-12; --Constitute of-In- junction, the enjoined, the argumentation of the Mi- maisā;-according to Kät- yayana, 241;-is synonymous with Mimamsa (according to some), 241;eternality of, 242; self-sufficient authority of the Veda, 242;-the uni- versal author of-, 
243;- Preservation of the-, 248;-- words in the--are the same as those in ordinary usage, 251-52:--Kumārila's view, 253;is related to the Brah- mana and the other two castes only, 313 Vedāngas, 218; Kumārila's servations, 218-19 
Vedi, 370 
Vedic study, 169-72 
ob- 
Vedic Injunction the only reli- able means of knowing Dharma, 176-77:-Regard- ing the use of words→ Nor is the, 245 
Verbal 
Cognition-Shabara's view, 110-125: Prabhā- 
xvi 
INDEX 
kara's view, 125, 128-43; Kumārila's view, 144;-and Vaisheṣika, 144; and Bauddha, 144 
Vernacular corrupt Vernacular-corrupt- 
are correct, 245-46 
words 
Vernacular words, 250 Vessel-Holding the, 347 Vidhiviveka, by Mandana Mishra, 
21-22 
Vidyas-fourteen-, 251 
the 
Vihāras (Place for keeping offering materials), 357 Vikalpa (option), 353;-sub- divisions of-, 354-58;-- indicated by Reasons, 351- 55;-Indicated by Direct Declaration, 355;-depen- dent on the wish of the Agent, 355;-other divi- sions of, 356-58 Vikrti (Ectype), 329-30 Vindhvä Hills South of- 
356 
Vishvajit Law, 321 Vishvaiit sacrific, 296, 
319, 
325;-Horse should not be given away at, 326;- Parents and such relations should not be given at 326 Animals mein should not be 
away 
with given 
away at, 326;-Entire earth should not be given away at, 326;-Shudra in one's service should not be given away for acquiring Dharma, 326: 385:-Nyāya, 296 Visnu Invocations to. 342 Visnu Purana regarding Heaven, 
67 
Visnukrama, 317 
Vishvedevas, 295. 342 
Vishvamitra and a Charḍāla. 
225, 229 
Vivarana, 20 
Vrdhanvati Mantra. 356-57 Wearing of the gold necklace, 
291: should be 
the husband only. Vachaspati Mishra, the 
done done by 
311 
Great, 
2;-Enumeration works, 2 
of his 
Varaha Mihira-son of Shabara 14;-4th century 
Svāmi, 
A.D. 
Vedanta and Mīmāmsā not two different systems, 4;-stands for, 5;-its scope, 5;- proper, 6;-Sūtra, 6 Vēdāntins-later, 8 
the 
Vaidika Dharma-to save-is the immediate purpose of two Mīmāmsās, 7 
Vidyapati Thakura; 14 Vidyaranya in his Vivarana- 
prameyasangraha, 
to Pra- 
bhakara's omission of some Sūtras to comment upon, 18 
Vidyasthānas, 1 Vārtikakāra as 
Kumārila, 15 
different from 
Vrtti-mentioned by Kumārila, 
15 
Vrttikara of Pūrva-Mīmāṁsā, 6 
W 
Wearing of the gold necklace, 291.-should be done by the husband only, 311 Wife unequal with husband, 313-functions of-at the sacrifice, 311-13;-if un- willing the husband should not perform sacrifices. 311: ---does not stand on the same footing as the hus- band. 312: not learned in the Veda, 312;-no justifica- tion for assuming the know- ledge of Veda in-, 313;- share to which she is titled, 369;-is entitled to a mere subsistence allow- ance. 369;-Rights of- 370 
en- 
Wild sesamum offering. 347 Woman-has housthold pro- perty, 310-alone should not perform sacrifices, 310; -entitled to perform sacri 
fices discussed, 
308-10;- 
cannot possess wealth, 309; -does not have any right over her father's property, 309;-are bought and sold, 309;-what she earns will not be her own, 309;-should not behave as if she were independent of her husband, 310;-should not be ignored in matters re- lating to duty, property and pleasure, 310;-not entitled to the study of the Vedas which is not mentioned in the Sutras, 312;-cannot re- cite the Mantras with the proper accent, etc., 312;- prohibited to the Vedic study discussed, 312-13;- are not entitled to perform sacrifices apart from her husband; 368;-Rights of 
- 368;-can adopt a son only in the company of her husband or when permitted by him, 317 
Word-as eternal, 132;-and its denotation-their rela- tion -112-17;-Kumārila's view, 145-50; Murāri Mishra's view, 146;-and Akrti according to Murări, 146: eternality of the word -Kumārila's view, 150;- cannot be the means of knowing Dharma, 176;- eternality of, 177;-as the means of Dharma, 177;- exact significance of cer. tain-, 233-35;-current 
INDEX 
xvii 
236- 
among Mlechchhas, 38; Evolution of, 50; origin of, 219 
Wrong Cognitions-Prabhakara's view, 81-83; Kumärila's view, 86-87 
Worship and meditation-forms 
of-, 39 
X 
Y 
Yaga, Homa and Dāna distin. 
guished, 360 
Yajnavalkya, 367 
Yoga Philosophy and God, 4;- 
on matter and spirit, 11 Yajnavalkya Smrti, 1, 3, 6 Yajnopavita, 223 
Yajus-defined, 186;-should be 
recited loudly, 281 
Yajurveda comes from Vayu, 281 Yājyänuvāka text, 301 
Yashordhārā (minor sacrifice), 
363 Yavāgū, 299 Yoga, 222 Yogachara-Buddhist 
59 Yoktra, 318 Yudhisthira, 231 
Z 
Idealist, 
APPENDIX 
CRITICAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
PREAMBLE T 
As directed by the author of the Purva- Mimaṁsā in its Sources- the Revered Mahāmahopadhyāya Dr. Sir Ganganatha Jha, when I handed over the Index of his book to Professor R. D. Ranade of the Allahabad University, I was asked by the latter to write a short critical bibliography on Mīmāmsă containing texts published and unpublished and explanations and criticisms as well as articles in Reviews and Journals which have hitherto appeared on Mīmāmsā, as an Appendix to this work. Prof. Ranade wrote to Dr. Jha who gladly expressed his agreement and wrote to me, "If you and Prof. Ranade agree on any point, you need not ask me about it. It is a stupendous task that Prof. Ranade has set you. I hope you will make it as complete as you can." This was no longer a mere request of a colleague but an Ajñā of the Great Master, and I began the work in right earnest. The notes were finished in due course and, when Dr. Jha returned to Allahabad in serious ill-health, I had the good luck of discussing with him some of the more important points of my notes. After this I began to fair out my notes hoping to finish the work and present it to him while he was alive. But unfortunately, before I could complete my work, he left us. How- ever, his immortal Atman which is ever with us, will now see that his Aina has been obeyed; but to what extent, it is for others to judge. It was not possible to make the work as exhaustive as I wanted it to be, but as far as I think no important author has escaped my notice. 
As this is the last work which I had the fortune to do at his instance, and which he did not live to see, I dedicate this humble offerring—an Añjali of respectful love-to the divine memory of the Great Master. 
THE UNIVERSITY, 
ALLAHABAD, 
December 3, 1941. 
UMESHA MISHRAकुसुमाञ्जलिः 
शाके त्र्यङ्कसमुद्रचन्द्रलसिते (१७९३) मासे नभस्येऽधिके पक्षे शौक्लचयुते जगद्धितकरे पूर्णेन्दुसंज्ञे तिथौ । गायत्रीसमुपासनेन सकलं देशं समुद्दीपयन् गङ्गानाथसुतं वरं समजनीच्छ्रीतीर्थनाथो द्विजः ॥ १ ॥ लब्ध्वा जन्म सुगन्धवारिनगरे देशे विदेहप्रभो- गङ्गानाथमहाशयः सुकृतिनां सच्छ्रोत्रियाणां कुले । काशीं प्राप्य दिगन्तविश्रुतगुरोरभ्यस्य शास्त्राणि यः पाण्डित्येन मनोहरेण बहुलामादाय कीर्त्ति पराम् ॥२॥ . शाके वह्निरसाष्टभूमिसहिते (१८६३) मार्गे दले श्यामले षष्ठ्यां सूर्यदिने निशीथसमये पद्मासने संस्थितः । लीलां तीर्थपतौ प्रयागनगरे संहृत्य तां लौकिकीं यातोऽस्मान् स्वजनान् विहाय रुदतो देवान् पुनः सेवितुम् ||३|| पुत्रास्तस्य विपश्चितो विलयने शोकं परं प्राप्नुवन् प्राप्ता दीनतमां दशां परिजनाश्छात्रास्तथा पण्डिताः । विद्या सा गतभर्तृकेव विकला याता शुचा सर्वतो 
हो तीर्थपते ध्रुवं कथय नस्त्वं कामवस्थां गतः ||४|| आसीद्यो नववर्त्मलालसनृणां पाश्चात्यशिक्षावतां पूर्वेषामपि सत्क्रियादिकरणे विद्यावतां सर्वथा । आदर्शो नु पुनः सदैव शरणं प्राचीनसत्पद्धतेः प्रज्ञानामुपकारकश्च सततं येोऽभूदनौपम्यभाक् ॥५॥ शास्त्रे यः प्रतियातना सुरगुरोरासीच्च नीतौ पुन- लैकिक्यां विदुरोपमः सहृदयश्वात्रे सगोत्रे तथा । मीमांसातरुसञ्चितैः सुकुसुमैः सम्यक् कृतां श्रद्धयो- मेशः श्रीगुरवे समर्पयति सन्मालाममुष्मा इमाम् ||६|| 
CRITICAL BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MIMĀMSĀ 
(MĪMĀṀSĀ —KUSUMĀÑJALI) 
It is necessary to say in the very beginning that there exists a very close relation between Pürva-Mimamsa and Dharmashastra. In fact, the Principles of Mimamsā form the very background of our Dharmashastra. All the rules of our Dharmashastra have to be interpreted with the help of the Mimāmsā-Nyāyas. So a Dharma- shastri has necessarily to become a Mimāmsaka first. Thus, almost all the writers on Dharmashastra, from Manu down to any author of the present day, have been good Mimaisakas also. In this bibliography, however, I have confined myself to those authors mainly whose work has come to my notice in any form. But that there were many more Mīmāsakas is quite evident from our 
studies of the Shastras. 
PRE-JAIMINI 
The earliest available work in the systematised form of the Purva-Mīmaisā School is the Sutra-work of Jaimini. But that there were several other teachers who taught the Pūrva-Mīmāmsā Principles before Jaimini is quite evident from the various references made to them and to their views by Jaimini himself in his Sutra- work. A short account of all such references is given below. 
BADARAYANA 
Under Pūrva-Mīmāmsa-Sutra, I. i. 5, Jaimini says that according to Bādarāyaṇa "the relation of the word with its denotation is eternal; instruction (in the form of word) is the means of knowing Dharma; (words are) infallible regarding all that is imperceptible; it is a valid means of knowledge, as it is independent." 
Again, under V. ii. 19, Jaimini says that according to Bādară- "the Ectypal details should come at the end; because, those that come from the Archetype are such as are included in what is expressed by the words laying down the Principal sacrifice." 
Again, under VI. i. 8, in answer to the prima facie view that men alone are entitled to perform the sacrifice, Jaimini quotes the view of Badarāyaṇa, which is the Siddhanta, that "in reality, it is the 
5 
6 
MĪMĀṀSĀ—KUSUMĀÑJALI 
whole class (jāti), that is, both men and women, that is entitled to perform the sacrifice; because there is no ground for distinction." 
Under X. viii. 44, in refutation to the prima facie view, Jaimini again quotes Badarāyaṇa who holds that "the offering of the curd-butter-mixture comes before the Soma sacrifice also." 
Again under XI. i. 64, in answer to the prima facie view, Jaimini quotes Acārya Bādarāyaṇa according to whom "there should be a single performance in common of the subsidiaries; because, there is no separation of context. There is one and the same con- text for all the main sacrifices, as they function jointly." 
It is clear from the above that in support of purely Mimainsā topics Jaimini quotes Badarayaṇa with great reverence and is in agreement with his views. The name of Badarāyaṇa is more known to us as the author of the Brahmasutra. But we cannot, on the basis of the evidence of the views quoted above, have the least doubt that Badarāyaṇa, quoted in the Jaiminiya-Sutras, is a Mīmāṁsaka. 
Now, regarding the identification of these two Badarāyaṇas, it is very difficult to say anything for or against definitely. Neither any external nor any internal evidence is available. But it may be suggested that as the two systems of Mimamsa and Vedanta, generally known as Pūrva-Mimāṁsā and Uttara-Mimāṁsā, are not quite distinct from each other, rather they represent separately the two aspects of one and the same Goal and which is also supported by the terins, Purva (preliminary) and Uttara (final), used for the Mīmāinsa proper and the Vedanta respectively, the teacher of the Uttara school also may have been the teacher of the Purva. In fact, the study of the Uttara school necessitates the study of the Purva. It is, therefore, that the great Mimamsa teacher Kumārila deliberately has asked the enquirer after the nature of Self to refer to the Vedanta. So it seems quite possible that Badarayaṇa must have had his own contributions to the school of Purva-Mīmāmsā also. Hence, it may be said that the two Badarāyaṇas were identical. There are some critics who are opposed to this identity, but they appear to overlook the fact that one and the same person can hold views on two different schools of thought. Badarāyaṇa could equally have had authoritative views on Mīmāṁsā as well as Vedanta. We know that there were several authors, Vacaspati Mishra I, etc., for instance, who were equally authoritative as Naiyayikas, Mimamsakas, Vedantins, and so on.. 
BADARI 
References: i) Indian Antiquary, Vol. L, pp. 167-174; ii) Journal of Oriental Research, Madras, 1937; iii) Introduction to Pūrva-Mimamsa, Pashupatinatha Shastri, pp. 25-42. 
BADARI 
Badari is another important teacher whom Jaimini refers to in his Sutra-work. Under III. i. 3, according to Jaimini, Bādari is of opinion that the auxiliary character (sheşalakṣaṇam) belongs to substances, properties and preparations. This view, however, is not accepted by Jaimini. 
Again, under VI. i. 27, Bādari, as a supporter of the prima facie view, says "that the text quoted in support of the statement, that the Shudra is not entitled to the performance of sacrifices, is only a contingent one; hence, all the castes should be entitled to perform the sacrifices." This view also is not the accepted 'Siddhanta. 
Again, in connection with the sattrimshadrātra-sacrifice, re- garding the question-are the details to be adopted at it to be those of the Ahan offerings comprising the Drādashāha or those of the şaḍaha? Badari, under VIII. iii. 6, says-even though there is repetition of the time, yet inasmuch as the actions are diverse, the details adopted should be those of the Dradashāha. This view 
has also not been accepted by the Siddhantin. 
Next, in the case of such injunctions as-one sings the Rathan- tara Sāman over the Uttara verses, the question is raised whether the singing is to be done in accordance with the syllables of the Uttara verses or with those of the basic verse- Badari, under IX. ii. 33, is in agreement with the Siddhanta that the singing should be done in accordance with the syllables of the Uttara verses and not in accordance with the part of the basic verse. 
Again, Bădari believed that the auxiliary character (sheṣatā) belongs to substance (dravya), quality (guna) and disposition (saṁskāra) only and to no other category (ride Bhāvanāviveka, Pt. I, p 41, Saraswatibhavana Text Series edition.) 
In the Brahmasutras (I. ii. 30; III i. 11; IV. iii. 7; IV. iv. 10) also certain views are attributed to one Badari Regarding the identity of these two Bādaris, again, one may differ, but in the absence of any definite proof I do not see any reason why the same Bādari be not allowed to speak authoritatively on both the Mīmāmsās, 
8 
MĪMĀṀSĀ-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
Katyayana-Shrautasūtra (IV. 96) makes a reference to one Badari. There is nothing to prevent us to regard him also as identical with the two other Badaris referred to above. Dr. T. R. Chintamani thinks that "Badari may have been the son of one Badara and an ancestor of Badarāyaṇa, and consequently, slightly older than Bādarāyaṇa." This is merely a suggestion 
AITISHAYANA 
Another important Mimamsaka is Aitishayana. Jaimini refers to him thrice. Thus, under III. ii. 43, while propounding the Siddhānta Jaimini holds with him that one and the same Mantra should be used at the eating of the remnants of all offerings." 
44 
Again, under III. iv. 24, in answer to the objection of the up- holders of the prima facie view, Jaimini refers to the opinion of Aitishāyana who says, "In reality, there must be some connection between the acts under consideration and a result, just like the connection of other things with particular results. It must there- forė be regarded as an action accomplishing the purpose of man in general." 
Lastly, under VI. i. 6, Aitishayana says, "On account of the use of the particular gender (that is, masculine in the text-svar- gakāmo yajeta) only men are entitled to perform the sacrifice." Jaimini does not agree with this view. 
Nothing more we know of this Acarya. 
KĀRṢṆĀJINI 
। 
Kārṣṇājini is another important teacher whose views Jaimini has referred to twice. Thus, under IV. iii. 17, regarding the Rātri sacrifice text—प्रतितिष्ठन्तीह य एता उपयन्ति । ब्रह्मवर्चस्विनोऽन्नादा भवन्ति य एता 344fa-"those who have recourse to these sacrifices become famous; those who have recourse to these sacrifices become endowed with Brahmic glory and also eaters of food," Karṣṇajini, in support of the prima facie view says-that the above-quoted sentence is commendatory in regard to the sacrifice, like the sentence speaking of the accessory details. 
CC 
Again, under VI. vii. 36, regarding the thousand-year sacrifice, he, in support of the prima facie view, says, What is laid down should be regarded as a function for generations, as it is impossible 
ATREYA 
for a single man to live for thousand years and complete th sacrifice." 
In both the cases, Jaimini respectfully disagrees with Karṣṇ} jini. He is, like so many others, referred to both in the Mimamsa and Brahmasutras, (cf. Brahmasūtra, III. i. 9). This name is also very familiar in our Dharmashastra. In Katyayana-Shrautasütra, also, we find his name mentioned in one of the sutras (I. 144). It is just possible that one and the same Karṣṇajini might have written on Mimamsa, Vedanta and Dharmashastra. Nothing more is known about him at present. 
LĀVUKĀYANA 
Lāvukāyana's view has been only once given by Jaimini under VI. vii. 38, where in support of the Siddhanta, Lavukāyana says that there being mutual inconsistency in the text—–पञ्चपञ्चाशतस्त्रिवृतः 
-one of the two terms must be taken in the indirect figurative sense. We do not know more about him as yet. 
KAMUKAYANA 
Regarding the text there are fourteen oblations at the Purna- māsa-sacrifice and thirteen at the Darsha, under XI. i. 57, supporting the Siddhāntin, Kāmukāyana says that there should be a single performance, so that there may be no incompatability with the limitation of the number of oblations fixed at fourteen and thirteen. The same argument has been reiterated by Kamukāyana under. XI. i. 62. No more about this author also is known to us as yet. 
ATREYA 
The name of Atreya is found in several places. Bandhayana- Grhyasutra (III. ix. 6) refers to one Atreya as a Padakāra (Ātreyāya Padakārāya) Bodhāyana-Shrautasūtra (XXI. 21) also speaks of one Atreya. In the Mahābhārata (XIII. 137.3) also the name of a sage, called Ātreya, is mentioned as a teacher of Nirguna-Brahmavidyā. In the Brahmasūtra (III. iv. 44) also there is a reference to one Atreya. Dr. T. R. Cintamani quotes a few verses from the Caturvargarintā- mani which are attributed to one Atreya. Besides, Jaimini refers to the views of one Atreya thrice in his Pūrva-Mimamsa-Sutras. It is just possible that all these names may refer to one and the same person. Thus, under IV. iii. 18, in answer to the prima facie view 
F. 2 
• 
10 
MIMÄMSÄ KUSUMĀNJALI 
advanced by Kārṣṇājini, Ātreya gives us the Siddhanta that-What is spoken of should be taken as the actual result; because, it is so mentioned; if no result were mentioned, one would have to be in- ferred. So, Atreya holds that the results actually follow from acts like the Rātri-sacrifices, and hence, the sentence-fafasta e ar gà, 
६ य एता उपयन्ति, 
34, etc., in connection with the Ratri-sacrifice, is not a mere commendatory declaration. 
Again, under VI. i. 26, regarding the performance of sacrifices by the Shūdra, Atreya gives us the Siddhanta that-in reality, the acts in question can be performed by the three higher castes only, as in connection with the Installation of Fire, these three alone have been mentioned. The Shudra, therefore, can have no connec- tion with sacrifices. The Veda being applicable to the Brāhmaṇa and the other two castes only. 
Lastly, under V. ii. 18, regarding the performance of the Nariṣṭa- Homa, Atreya says-" What belongs to the Ectype should be per- formed immediately after the principal sacrifice; as it is equal to it in being prescribed by a Vedic text: as for those that come from the original Archetype, they may be removed further." 
ÄLEKHANA 
Alekhana is another Mīmāsaka who is referred to by Jaimini. Under VI. v. 17, in connection with the performance of the Abhyu- dayeşţi on the Moon rising, before the material has been prepared, Alekhana propounds the Siddhānta that the material should be prepared and consecrated for those deities who partake of the subse- quent offerings. 
Besides, it is said that there is also a reference to him in the Sankarşakanda under XVI. ii. 1. This Alekhana is very often quoted in the Shrautasūtra attributed to one Bharadvaja or Bharad- vāja. 
This Bharadvaja may be identical with that Bharadvaja whose views are found in the Arthashāstra of Kautilya, who, again, perhaps is the same as the teacher of the Rajashastra mentioned in the Mahabharata (Shāntiparva, 58.3). If all these identifications be correct, then as the date of the Arthashastra, according to Dr. A. B. Keith, cannot be placed earlier than 100 B. C. but not later than second century A.D., Bharadvaja should have flourished earlier than Kautilya; and Alekhana, in that case, must have lived long before 
JAIMINI 
11 
Bharadvaja, that is, earlier than 100 B. C. Nothing more about Alekhana is known as yet. 
JAIMINI 
The name of Jaimini in the Purva-Mimaisa-Sutra occurs in five places (III. i. 4; VI. iii. 4; VIII, iii. 7; IX. ii 39; and XII. i. 8). Of these references, except one (VI. iii. 4), all the rest refer to the Siddhantas and can easily be attributed to Jaimini, the author of the Pūrva-Mimaṁsa-Sūtras But the reference to Jaimini in the Sūtra VI. iii. 4, as it represents the prima facie view, is doubted whether it refers to the same Jaimini or to some other Jaimini Had he been identical how could have it been possible for him to hold simultaneously both the prima facie view and the Siddhanta view regarding the same topic? Moreover, while commenting upon the rest of the Sutras, Shabara adds the word 'Acārya' to the name of Jaimini, while in the present case, he simply says इति जैमिनिः मन्यते स्म and omits the usual term of respect. Similarly, although the name of Jaimini is not mentioned in the Sútra VI. iii. 1, yet Shabara attributes the view expressed therein, which is the prima facie one, to Jaimini, and there also Shabara omits the use of the usual term showing respect. 
It is concluded from all these that there were two Jaiminis- one, the author of the existing Purva-Mimäinsä-Sutras and the other, who was also a Mimaisaka but not identical with the author of the present Sutras. The other Jaimini is certainly earlier than the present Sütrakāra There was also an astrologer of the same name who wrote a Sütra-work on Astrology. 
Regarding the view that as it is impossible to name one's own- self in his own work he two cannot be identical, it may be said that there is no incongruity in it; for there are innumerable instances in Indian literature where such references are found. Perhaps this is an Indian characteristic of expression. 
Almost all these Pre-Jaimini Mimamsakas, whether they had written any work on Miniamsa or not, were, undoubtedly, great teachers of Mimaisa, who had their independent views on the school. It is also just possible that he who was a Mimamsaka might have been a Vedantin too. It is corroborated by the respectful references of the various Ācāryas in both the systems.12 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
KASHAKUTSNA AND APISHALI 
Besides these, there were many more Mimäinsakas who lived and taught before the beginning of the Christian Era and who have been mentioned in our earlier works, although Jaimini does not make any reference to them For instance, the names of Kashakṛtsna and Apishali, as teachers and perhaps founders of independent schools of Pūrva-Mīmāmsa, are found in the Vyakaraṇa Mahabhāṣya and the Panini's Sūtra (viide Mahabhasya, IV. 1. 3, 14, and Pa SŪ. VI. i 92 ) In fact, these two teachers must have been very old. Apishali is, undoubtedly, older than Panini himself. Both of these two Mimaisakas were great Grammarians and perhaps, were authors of some work also. 
On the basis of these references it may be said that the Princi- ples of Pürva-Mimämsä were systematised long before Jaimini; for, the various views of the various Acaryas would not have been so very clear and distinct without it. Besides, the expressions, like- Apishali Mīmāṁsā, Kāshakṛtsni Mimāṁsā,* etc. from the mouth of of Patanjali, would have never been, otherwise, possible. This is further supported by the fact that in the Apastambadharmasūtra we find several Sūtras similar in substance to the Jaiminiyasūtras. A few instances are given below to illustrate the above: 
APASTAMBADHARMASŪTRAS 
1. श्रुतिर्हि बलीयस्यानुमानिकादाचारात् 
-I. 1. 4. 8. 
2. विप्रतिषेधे श्रुतिलक्षणं बलीयः 
-I. 11. 30. 90 
3. यत्र तु प्रीत्युपलब्धितः प्रवृत्तिर्न तत्र 
शास्त्रमस्ति - I. 4. 12. 11 
4. Sūtra - I. 1. 4.9-10. 
5. श्रङ्गानां तु प्रधानैरव्यपदेश इति 
न्यायवित्समयः II. 4. 8. 13. 
JAIMINIYAS TRAS 
विरोधे त्वनपेक्ष्यं स्यादसति ह्यनुमानम् - I. iii. 3. 
यस्मिन् प्रीतिः पुरुषस्य तस्य लिप्सार्थ- लक्षणाविभक्तत्वात् IV. 1. 2 
--- 
दृश्यते चापि प्रवृत्तिकारणम् । प्रीतिर्बुप- लभ्यते -- हेतुदर्शनाच्च - I. iii. 4 प्रयोगशास्त्रमिति चेत् - I. iii. 11 नासंनियमात् - Iiii. 12 
- 
श्रवाक्यशेषाच्च – I. iti. 13 सर्वत्र च प्रयोगात्सन्निधानशास्त्राच्च 
--I. iii. 14. 
* Patañjali tells us that a Brahmanī studied 'काशकृत्स्नो', that is, काशकृत्सिना प्रोक्ता मीमांसा-- ride Mahabhaeya IV. 1. 3; IV. iii. 2. pp. 111, 311, Benares Edition. 
JAIMINI 
13 
APASTAMBADHARMASUTRAS 
JAIMINIYASŪTRAS 
6. अथापि नित्यानुवादमविधिमा हुन्यय- श्रर्थवादो वा विधिशेषत्वात् तस्मान्नित्या- 
विदः - II. 6. 14. 13 
7. तस्यां 
VI. vii. 30. 
क्रयशब्दः संस्तुतिमात्रम् । क्रयस्य धर्ममात्रत्वम् - VI. 1. 15 
धर्माद्धि सम्बन्धः - II. 6.13 11-12 
8. विद्यां प्रत्यनध्यायः श्रूयते, न कर्मयोगे 
मन्त्राणाम् - I. 4. 129. 
i. 
विद्यां प्रति विधानाद्वा सर्वकालं प्रयोगः स्यात् कर्मार्थत्वात् प्रयोगस्य 
-XII. iii. 19.. 
Besides these, there are several other similarities between these two Sūtra-works. Shabara, Kumarila and other later writers have very often referred to the Sutras of Apastamba. It is very difficult to say whether Apastaniba was influenced by Jaimini or he flourished earlier than Jaimini and had some other Sutra-work of Pūrva- Mimäisa before him. However, it is certain that Jaimini was not the first systematiser of the Principles of Purva-Mimāmsā. The Guru-Paramparā tradition found in several later works also sup- ports the antiquity of the system. Parthasarathi Mishra in his commentary on the Shloka-värttika, called Nyayaratnākara (p. 8), says that Brahma, Prajapati, Indra, Aditya, Vasistha, Parashara, Kṛṣṇadvaipayana and Jaimini were the teachers of MImänsä one after another. Ramakṛṣṇa, in his commentary, called Siddhanta-candrikā, on the Shastradīpikā, reads Agni in place of Aditya, and says that according to others Maheshvara should be substituted in place of Brahma. The third view is that the first teacher of Mimäinsä was either Brahma or Maheshvara who taught to Prajapati The latter. had four pupils-Indra, Aditya, Brhaspati, and Manu. Manu taught to Vasistha who, in his turn, taught to Parashara who taught to Kṛṣṇadvaipayana and he, in his turn, taught to Jaimini (vide Mimämsäsütrārthasangraha by Parameshvara). 
About the personal history of Jaimini we know from the Panca- tantra that he was crushed to death by an elephant (vide II. 36). From the Bhagavata Purāņa (XII. vi. 55) we learn that he was taught Samavedasamhita by his teacher Vyāsa. He, in his turn, taught the same to Sumantu. 
Regarding the date of Jaimini, Prof. Jacobi thinks that he can- not be earlier than the second century A.D; for he, being a contem- porary of Badarayana, was quite conversant with the theory of 
14 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMANJALI 
Shunya advocated by Nagarjuna in the second century A.D. Dr. Keith holds that he cannot be later than 200 A.D., but not much earlier. But Prof. Jacobi's argument is not quite correct. The reason is that though Nagarjuna was a great advocate of Shünya- rada, yet it is quite wrong to hold that he was the originator of the theory. One can easily trace the theories of Shunya and Vijñāna, which came to be associated with the Buddhist thought later, even to some of the oldest Upanisads and also to the works of Ashvaghoşa and other ancient Pali works (vide Introduction to the Hindi Translation of Ratnaprabhā, by Mm. Gopinatha Kaviraja, p 3). So the fact is that these Buddhist thoughts in some form or other did exist long before Nagarjuna could record them in his Kärikās. Hence, the above view is untenable. Again, it is believed that the earliest commentator of the Pūrva-Mīmamsa-Sutras is perhaps the Vṛttikāra-Upavarga; and as he, according to the critics, is placed long before Patanjali, we may easily push back the date of Jaimini to a period earlier than 200 B.C. at least. 
References-i) Jacobi-Date of Indian Philosophical systems-- Journal of American Oriental Society, XXXIII; ii) Journal of Oriental Research, Madras, Vol. III; iii) M Hiriyanna's Introduc- tion to Naiskarmyasiddhi, Second Ed.; iv) Indian Antiquary, Vol. L-Jaimini and Badarāyaṇa; v) Dr. Keith's Karma-Mimāṁsā. 
The Purva-Mīmāmsa-Sūtra is divided into 12 chapters, each chapter devoted to one particular topic, due to which it is also called Dradashalaksant. There is also a belief that there are four more chapters of the Jaiminiya-sutra known as the Sankarşa-Kanda but this portion has not yet been verified* (vide-Text, pp. 11-13). Like other Sutra-works, each chapter is divided into certain Padas. Now, there are certain peculiarities regarding this Sūtra-work:- 
(1) Unlike other Sutra-works, the number of Padas in each chapter is not fixed at four, which might have had some special convention about it. Here, we have four Padas in Chapters I, II, IV, V, VII, VIII, IX, XI, and XII; while Chapters III, VI and X have each 8 Pādas 
* The work, bearing the title-Sankarsa-Kayda along with the commentary called Bhatta-candrika published from Benares, is not the authentic work. Devaswami's Commentary on the Sankarsa-Kāṇḍa may throw more light on the 
problem. 
UPAVARSA AND BODHAYANA 
15 
(2) In no other Sutra-work there is so much repetition of any Sutra, either in full or in parts, as here. For instance, the Sutra 'f' occurs 30 times; again, the Sutra ‘amı qıcıûction occurs 24 times, of course, in each case of repetition, the meaning changes according to the context; while the Sūtras लिङ्गदर्शनात्, पूर्व च लिङ्गदर्शनात्, लिङ्गाच्च, धर्मानुग्रहाच्च, तथा च लिङ्गदर्शनम्, श्रन्ते वा कालकृतत्वात्, fant g act e, etc., etc., have also been repeated 
several times. 
(3) In order to illustrate Mimamsā topics even the Sūtrakāra 
takes help of instances from phenomenal life. 
IV.i.6). 
(vide 
He is also said to be the author of a work called-Chandogyānu- vāda (pada ?) ef. Lavâfùfàa sıravag¶—Tantravārttika, I.iii.2 (5)) Some also attribute the authorship of a Shrautasūtra and a Grhya- sutra to him (cf. Keith, pp. 4-5). 
The special field covered by Pūrva-Mimāṁsā is an enquiry into the nature of Dharma, duty of man, and topics directly or indirectly con- nected with it. The twelve topics are-1) Means of knowing Dharma, 2) Differentiation among Action (Karmabheda), 3) Auxiliaries (She- şatra); 4) Mutual subserviency among Actions (Prayojya-Prayoja- kabhāra); 5) Order of Sequence (Krama); 6) Qualification of a sacrificer etc. (Adhikara); 7) Sāmänyātidesha, meaning that there are details in connection with other sacrifices; 8) Visheṣātidesha, meaning that such and such details appertain to such and such a sacri- fice; 9) Modification of details (Uha); 10) Exclusion and Inclusion (Bādha and Abhyuccaya); 11) Common, Centralisation (Tantra); and 12) Uncommon, Decentralisation (Āvāpa). 
The first three chapters were translated into English by Sir Ganganatha Jha which was published in the Sacred Books of the Hindu Series from Allahabad in 1916. The whole of the Jaiminiya-sūtra (I-XII Adhyayas) was translated into English by Pt. Mohanlal Sandal, and was published from Allahabad. Dr. Ballantyne also translated the first Pada along with the Shabarabbasya, as early as 1851. 
UPAVARṢA AND BODHAYANA 
After Jaimini it appears that no other independent work was written on the system. There have been, undoubtedly, great 
16 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
scholars, but they have all based their contributions upon the Jaimi- niya-sūtras though they have given ample evidence of their originality in their commentaries. We have not as yet been able to unearth any work on the Satras between Jaimini and Shabara, but from the various references found here and there we think that there were at least two commentaries called Vrttis by Upavarșa and Bodhāyana. Shabara himself makes references to Upavarsa with great reverence in his Bhāṣya and it is believed that the reference to the Vetti- grantha is a reference to Upavarṣa's rtti. 
Regarding the personality of these two writers there have been different opinions amongst the critics. Mm. S. Kuppuswami Shāṣtrī holds that they are identical personages, but it appears from the reference to them in the Prapañcalıṛdaya that they were not identi- cal. Both of these two authors wrote separately on Jaiminiya- sutras (vide Prapañcahṛdaya, p. 39, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series Ed). This Bodhayana is perhaps the same as that on whose Vrtti Ramanujācārya has based his Shribhāṣya. 
The date of these two is as much in dark as their life-history. Nothing can be said with any certainty except that Upavarṣa lived before Shabara. Dr. Ganganatha Jha places him before the Chris- tian Era (vide Text, p. 14). The same date may be fixed for Bodhāyana also, as most likely, they were contemporaries 
BHAVADĀSA 
After these two Vṛttikaras, we come to Bhavadāsa who also wrote a Vriti on the Sutras. This assumption of ours is based on the single evidence of the Prapañcahrdaya, which definitely says that Bhavadāsa preceded Shabara. That Bhavadasa was a great Mimamsaka, who wrote a commentary called Vrtti on the Sutras, is also quite evident from the Shlokavārtṭika and its commentary by Pārthasarathi Mishra. While commenting on the Karika—y 
far diferendof: (verse 33), Parthasarathi says- 
लौकिकार्थव्यतिक्रमः 
- 'केषाञ्चित् - भवदासादीनां वृत्त्यन्तरेषु' Even Kumarila himself refers to him in the Shlokavārttika - प्रदर्शनार्थमित्येके के चिन्नानार्थवाचिनः । समुदायादवच्छिद्य भवदासेन कल्पितात् " ( pp. 21-22 ). 
" 
Regarding Bhavadasa's view we can only glean from Kumarila that he thought that the terms and : in the first Sutra should be read together, so that both together may give us the meaning of 
ai 
SHABARASWĀMĪ 
17 
(after). Again, we are told by Kumarila that Bhavadasa split up the fourth Sūtra into two parts-i) सत्संप्रयोगे पुरुषस्येन्द्रियाणां बुद्धिजन्म तत् प्रत्यक्षम् and ii) अनिमित्तं विद्यमानोपलम्भनत्वात् - the first half gives us the definition of Pratyaksa, while the second half speaks of the unauthori- tativeness() of it regarding Dharma. So says Parthasarathi- भवदासेनैतत्सूत्रं द्विधा कृत्वा 'सत्संप्रयोगे' इत्येवमादि 'तत्प्रत्यक्ष' मित्येवमन्तं प्रत्यक्ष- लक्षणपरम् | 'निमित्त' मित्यादि च तस्य धर्म प्रत्यनिमित्तत्वपरं व्याख्यातम् (pp. 133-34), Shabara, Kumarila and their followers all rejected these views of Bhavadāsa. 
SHABARASWĀMĪ 
We now come to the great Bhāṣyakāra of the Jaiminiyn-sūtras, His Bhāṣyn is the first complete work that we have got on the Jaiminiya-sutras before us. As for the personal history and date of Shabara we are still in dark. The tradition current amongst the Panditas is that he had six sons-one from his Brāhmaṇa-wife, named Varāhamihira, the great Indian astronomer; from the Kṣattriya- wife he had two sons, Raja Bharthari and the King Vikrama; from his Vaishya-wife he had the great Vaidya--Haricanda and Shanku, and lastly, from the Shudra-wife he had Amaru. Nothing can be based on this tradition with any certainty. He has referred to, in his Bhasya, the names of Katyayana, l'artlikakāra (X. viii. 4), Manu (I. i. 2), Paṇini, Pingala (I. i. 5); Sphoṭavādino Vaiyākaraṇāḥ (I. i. 5) and many more. But none of these helps us much to fix his date. So Dr. Ganganatha Jha thinks that if his relation with Varahamihira be believed in, we may say that he lived before 400 A.D. which is the probable date of the great astronomer. 
It is said that his original name was Adityadeva which he changed to Shabara when he disguised himself as a forester for fear of Jain persecution. Dr. Jha, on the basis of certain facts from his Bhagya, suggests his being a Northerner. Dr. Jha even goes so far as to say that he perhaps lived in Kashmir or Taksashila (ride Intro- duction to his English Trans., p. 1). No more about him we know. A few facts gleaned from his Bhāṣya are given below which are quite interesting and also may help us to come nearer the truth regarding his native place: 
(1) The text açerire ngisquefa (I iii. 9) meaning-Cows run after the Bargha (Shata. Bra. 4,4.3.19)-quoted by Shabara refers 
F. 3 
18 
MĪMĀMSA KUSUMANJALI 
to a custom, regarded as a religious duty, which falls on the day following the Dipavalt. This is even now prevalent in Mithila where it is called Hurahuri. 
(2) Shabara says-" In the case of pegs in the wall. we find each of them severally serving the purpose of supporting the hanging noose" (II. ii. 1). 
(3) The text - 'पयसा पाष्टिकं भुञ्जीत, यदि शालिं भुञ्जीत तत्र दधि उपसिञ्चेत्' meaning-one should eat Sastika (a kind of grain having black husk, called Gamhari, in Mithila) with milk; if he eats Shali paddy grains), he should mix curd with it (II. iii. 1). This indeed refers to the practice prevalent even now in Mithila that people cat Ṣāṣṭika with milk and shali with curd (Dahl-Cürā). 
(4) The text "Tiara: quiâ ya enfiar ezà' (III. i. 2), meaning Born slave is purchased for the sole purpose of working for the master-refers to the custom of slavery existing in North-East India for a very long time. 
(5) The text—'afààu ng amfe’(11I. i. 13), meaning-- Cleanses the Soma-vessel with 'the hem of the garment-refers to the practice prevalent amongst the ladies in the North-East of India. 
(6) The text-fafamı qfquì a a' (Viii. 26), meaning that birds should not be eaten by one who is 
fafa-shows 
that birds were regularly eaten in those days and which was known to Shabara. 
(7) Again, the text ‘amfagqiangiŝaçṁ Haftaar:' (VII. i. 12), meaning that Devadatta should be fed on rice, pulse, meat, and sweet-cakes (apūpa)—shows that he lived in that part of the country where the above-mentioned things were eaten during meals. 
1 
। 
(8) Not only meat as an ingredient of food was known to him but he knew the details of fish-eating too. For instance, the text- 'ये एकस्मिन् कार्ये विकल्पेन साधकाः श्रूयन्ते ते परस्परेण विरोधिनो भवन्ति । विरोधिनाञ्च न सह प्रवृत्तिः । लोकवत् - यथा मत्स्यान् न पयसा समश्नीयादिति । यद्यपि सगुणा मत्स्या भवन्ति तथापि पयसा सह न समश्यन्ते' (X. VII. 66 ), meaning - When several things are spoken of as accomplishing the same purpose, they are always regarded as mutually incompatible; and things that are mutually incompatible cannot function jointly; as in the ordinary world; for instance, when it is said "one should not eat fish with milk” the meaning is that "even though the fish be 
SHABARASWĀMĪ 
19 
possessed of excellent qualities, yet it is not eaten with milk" clearly shows that he was very familiar with the process of fish-eating. 
(9) The sentence - 'वाससि रागः क्रियते । (सौ) स्त्र्यर्थः पुरुषार्थो वा' 
colour is spoken of in connection 
as 
- 
श्रूयते - वासो रञ्जयतीति, वाससि च (VII. 1. 7), meaning —— Though the 
with the cloth,-in such sentences 
one colours the cloth, and it is also done or produced in the cloth, yet it does not subserve the purposes of the cloth; it subserves the purposes of man or woman (who wears the cloth), indicates that he knew that both man and woman put on coloured cloth. I do not think that man puts on coloured cloth either in Kashmir or in the North-Western side. 
(10) Again, the statement — 'बाहीकोऽतिथिरागतः यवान्नमस्मै प्रक्रियताम्' (VII.i.8), meaning that 'when it is said, that a Punjālā Bāhika) has come as guest, prepare for him barley-meal' shows that though he was aware of the manner of showing hospitality to the guests of the Punjab, yet we think that he would have given this information to non-Punjabis who did not know the above-mentioned custom. Had he been an inhabitant of the Punjab, perhaps he would not have found any opportunity to convey this information to others. 
(11) The instance- "the cooking of rice is of one kind, while that of molasses is of a totally different kind; so that the man who has learnt the cooking of rice cannot know how to cook molasses" (VII-ii-20), shows that he must have lived in that part of the country where cooking of both the rice and the molasses were known and he also knew the difference between the two methods. 
-- 
- 
'ओदने दधि दत्वाऽभ्यवहर्त्तव्यम् (IX iv 32), (12) The statement- that is, one should put curd into cooked rice and then eat it' refers to the custom of eating cooked rice and curd together (Dahi bhāta of Mithila). This very idea is repeated again when he says that- 'Devadatta should be fed with curds, clarified butter and rice' (X. vi 22). 
(13) Lastly, we find that the eating of oil like clarified butter, has been repeatedly referred to by Shabara. For instance, he says "Just as when oil or clarified butter is drunk,-though this drinking is ephemeral, yet it brings about strength, improvement of intelli- gence, memory and so forth" (VII. i. 5); again, he says-"Yajñadatta should be fed with oil; the purpose that is served in the food by the clarified butter is in the latter case understood to be served by oil; hence, even though it is not asserted in so many words that the food 
20 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
should be lubricated with oil, yet the oil serves to exclude the clarified butter (and no other substance)" (X. ii. 66); again, he says- "for a month Devadatta is to be fed on clarified butter and oil" (X. vi 5.); again, he says "the oil is used for the purpose of lubrica- ting the food", "Yajuadatta should be fed like Devadatta with oil" (X. vi. 22); again, he says-"feed Yajñadatta with oil," "oil is men- tioned as of use in the feeding"-"It is to be used in the place of clarified butter, the purpose of which alone can be served by oil, etc." (X. iii. 16). In those days when there was no scarcity of pure clarified butter, even then that he repeatedly mentioned the custom of using oil for food shows that he must have lived in that part where oil was much in use. It is but natural that ingredients of food like rice, fish and oil should go together. Even now we find it so in Bengal and Mithila 
(14) In one place he says there are certain illnesses which appear at fixed intervals, namely, the Terian and the Quartian ague \Tṛtiyakāsheāturthakāshca)-(VI. i. 5'. Undoubtedly, he must have lived where malerial diseases were quite known. 
(15) He refers to a Vedic custom of cooking coarser rice in curds and the finer rice in boiled milk (IX. iv. 41). Now, this is what is exactly the custom in Mithila where the former preparation is called 'ghoracāura', while the latter is known as 'khira.' 
These are some of the facts referred to by Shabara in his Bhagya which may suggest a nearer approach to his place of residence. 
Besides this Bhasya, he also wrote a commentary on the Sankarga which is clear from his own words (vide his Bhasya X. iv. 32; XII. ii. 11). 
One more characteristic of his Bhasya is that in many places he refers to the worldly customs in order to explain the Vedic injunc- tions, which shows the importance of the worldly instances even in Purva-Mimaṁsā. 
The Shabarabhāṣya has been edited in full thrice-1) from the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta; 2) from Vidyavilasa Press, Benares; and 3) from Poona, in the Anandashrama Sanskrit Series. All the editions are more or less of the same nature. This Bhasya has just been for the first time translated into English by Dr. Jha and published in 3 volumes in the Gaekwad's Sanskrit Series. The first Pada of the first Adhyaya has been also printed from Madras and Chowkhamba, Benares. 
These are 
well edited along with the 
KUMARILA BHATTA 
21 
Brhatt and the Rjurimala. Reference: Jacobi-Journal, American Oriental Society, Vol. XXI. 
BHARTRMITRA 
0 
Before coming to the great Varttikakāra Kumarila we should know something about Bhartṛmitra whose views have been referred to and refuted by Kumārila himself. As interpreted by Parthasarathi Mishra, Bhartṛmitra introduced many apasiddhantas (wrong theories) into the system and thus made it a Nastika system. Parthasarathi says that Bhartṛmitra taught that there is no fruit- good or bad - accruing from the performance of nitya and prohibited acts—which is a wrong view. He wrote a commentary on Mimamsa according to Parthasārathi (riile मीमांसायाश्चिरन्तनानि भर्तृमित्रादिरचितानि व्याख्यानानि facra 
etc., Nyayaratnākara, pages 3-4). Again, while discussing the nature of shrotra' (the auditory sense-organ), Kumārila says that it is this Samskara (modification) of the auditory sense as the means of apprehending sound, that some Panditammanyāḥ' (thinking themselves to be learned) hold to be the auditory sense which, according to Parthasarathi, Kumārila attributes to Bhar- trmitra and others (vide Shloka, p. 763). On this very question, Jayanta Bhatta quotes Bhartṛmitra in his Nyäyamañjarī (p. 213, Vizia. Ed.). Again, he too, like Kumarila, retorts Bhartṛmitra's view in the following words 'यत्तु भर्तृमित्रस्तमेव संस्कारं श्रोत्रेन्द्रियमभ्युपैति aftengdi fa f' (p. 226). Yamunacarya in his Siddhitraya also refers to one Bhartṛmitra (p. 6). Mukula Bhatta also refers to one Bhartṛmitra in his Abhidhāvṛttimātṛkā (p. 17); and most probably, they refer to one and the same person. 
4 
On the basis of these references, we may say that Bhartṛmitra flourished earlier than Kumārila. 
One more point we learn about Bhartṛmitra from the Shloka- vārttika (vide Citraksepaparihara, verse 14), as explained by Partha- sarathi, regarding the result accruing from the performance of the Citra sacrifice, that according to him the result accrues in the very life-time of the sacrificer, which, of course, Kumarila does not believe in. 
KUMARILA BHATTA 
Kumārila Bhaṭṭa, variously known as Kumārila Swāmin or Mishra, Tūtāta Bhatta, is one of the greatest scholars that India has2 
2 
MÏMĀṀSĀ—KUSUMĀNJALI 
produced. As a Mimaisaka, perhaps, his position is unchallenged. At that time, Buddhism, which has been, since its very inception, a great enemy of the Vedic ritualistic culture, had spread its influence far and wide in the country. The Buddhist University of Nalanda was then in a flourishing condition and there were a large number of Buddhist thinkers all over the country. They were attacking Hindu religion, philosophy and culture vehemently; and it was but neces- sary to refute their views for bringing about the downfall of Buddhism. It was also a fact that instead of all the Royal patronage, due to the various corruptions, Buddhism was on the point of declining. Thus, it was a very opportune moment for Kumārila to take his cudgle against Buddhism and criticise its viewpoints, and which he did so well in his masterly works-Shlokurārttika and Tantrararttiku. Such was the condition of the country when Kumarila flourished 
There are many stories recorded in the Shankaradiyvijaya and the Tibetian works regarding the nature of controversies which were carried on between Kumarila and the Buddhist Philosopher, Dharmakirti. In one place we are told that Dharmakirti, desirous of knowing the secrets of Hinduism, lived with Kumārila in disguise and having learnt all the secrets from him challenged the Hindu orthodox Philosophers in open debates, defeated them and converted them to Buddhism. Kumarila also was likewise defeated. Then the tradition says that Kumarila, also in disguise, learnt all the secrets of Buddhism from Buddhist monks and then defeated them in open challenge Thereby Kumarila committed a great sin against his own guru also whom he defeated in debate; and for the expiation of which he came over to Prayaga where he burnt himself alive on the banks of the Tribent, the only method of expiation for such a sin. It was here that the great Shankarācārya met him when Kumārila was half-burnt and expressed his desire to bring him (Kumarila) back to life which Kumārila did not like (vide faasu, VII). 
This was perhaps the reason why Kumarila's knowledge of Buddhist Philosophy was much more profound and accurate than that of the Great Shankarācārya even, which is quite evident from the study of their individual works. Anyhow, the place of Kumārila is unique in Indian thought. 
About his native place it is very difficult to say anything defini- tely. Some hold that he was a native of Southern India. But it is 
77 
KUMĀRILA BHAȚȚA 
• 
23 
much more probable, so says the tradition, that he was a Brahmana living in North Bihar Mithila, in Northern India; and from here he went to the South also. It was, therefore, so very easy for him to fight against the Buddhist crusaders who lived on the borders of Mithila, Anandagiri in his Shankaravijaya also says that he came from the North. He uses the word Udakudesha' for the North. In fact, the term which means "Place of Water" is very vague and cannot give the exact information. Mithila, which is also known as Tairabhukti (meaning those who lived or that desha which was situated on the banks of the rivers, so says the Bṛhadviṣṇu Purāṇa, Mithilākhanda, ‘सदा भुवनसम्पन्नो नदीतीरेषु संस्थितः । तीरेषु भुक्तियोगेन तैरभुक्तिरिति स्मृतः' || 'गंगाहिमवतोर्मध्ये नदीपञ्चदशान्तरे । तैरभुक्तिरिति ख्यातो देशः परमपावनः' ), may also be called rightly lakudesha,' and this being the place of hundreds of Mimaisakas in later centuries and also being quite close to the home of Buddhismi, seems to me to be the native place of Kumarila Bhatta also. This will also be in keeping with his relations with Mandana Mishra who, as both Anandagiri and Madha- vacarya hold, also most probably came from Mithila. 
We learn from the Tibetian sources that Kumarila was a family man and had a large number of rice fields and five hundred male and five hundred female slaves. No more about his personal history is known to us. He had perhaps a son named Jaya Mishra. 
Regarding his date, Taranatha, the Tibetian Lama, in his History of Indian Buddhism, says that Kumarila was a contemporary of the Tibetian king Srong-tsan-Gampo who ruled over Tibet in the 7th century. Again, that he had controversy with Dharmakirti. whose date is about 635 A. D. and after, also lends support to his being in the 7th century. Next, Bhavabhuti, who calls himself Kumārila's pupil, lived in the court of Yashovarman of Kanauj who ruled about 730 A. D. which also suggests that Kumarila lived towards the end of the 7th or the beginning of the 8th century. His reference to the lines of Vakyapadiya of Bhartṛhari who died about 650 A. D. shows that he lived sometime after him. From all these it appears that Kumārila, who was a senior contemporary of the Great Shankara, lived sometime towards the end of the 7th century. 
Prefessor S. Kuppuswami Shastri holds that he lived between 600 and 660 A D. (vide Introduction to the Brahmasiddhi). Dr. Jha makes him a junior contemporary of Prabhakara whose date he thinks to be between 600 and 650 A. D. 
24 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMANJALI 
He is the reputed author of the Shlokavārttika, the Tantrav☎- rttik and the Tuptika, the well-known three parts of his com- mentary on Shabara's Bhasya. Besides, he is also ascribed to be the author of one Brhattika and another Madhyamaţikā. According to Parthasarathi Mishra, Kumärila himself refers to his Byhaṭṭikā in the Shlokavārttika, Sūtra 5, Arthāpattipariccheda, verse 9. (vide, श्रर्थापत्त्यन्तराणामप्युदाहरणप्रपञ्चः पक्षदोषावसरे 'श्रोत्रादिनास्तिताया' मित्यादिना 'वृहट्टीकायां' दर्शित इत्याह- पक्षदोषेष्विति). 
Shlokararttika is a commentary in verse on the first Pada, generally known as the Tarkapada, of the first chapter of the Shabara- Bhāṣya. So it deals mainly with the Philosophical topics according to Pūrva-Mimaisā. He refutes the Buddhist view particularly on almost all the Philosophical topics. As his own views have been given in the body of the text itself, under different heads by the author of this very work, Dr. Jha, it is needless for me to repeat them here. I shall, however, refer to some other points, which are not less interesting, from the Shlokavārtlika, below : 
1. Conception of Mokşa: Mokşa is possible through the absence of the cause of bondage, which is brought about by the exhaustion of the past actions (through the experiencing of the results of those acts). It is this negative character (abhāvātmaka) which is the cause of the eternality of Molşa; And, he says, no negation (abhāva) can ever be the effect of any action, hence Mokga which is of the nature of negation can never be the result of Jñana. Regarding the process of the exhaustion of actions, he says that for those who have realised the true nature of the Self, all their past actions having been exhausted by experience, and there being no subse- quent residue of action, there is no more production of any organic body. This is what is required for Mokşa (vide Shloka, pp. 670-71, Benares edition). 
In this very connection he says that a desirer for Mokga should not perform Kāmya and prohibited actions, but he should perform daily (itya) duties and Naimittika actions for the expiation of sins. The performance of these two types of action is meant for the annihilation of the demerits of previous births. Then alone the upāsanā regarding the Atman will annihilate the previous actions and thus will also help the cause of Mokşa (ibid.) 
2. Regarding the nature of the Atman, he says that it is self- illumined. ( श्रात्मनैव प्रकाश्योऽयम् ) and that it is manifested by itself (ride, Shloka., Ätmavada, Verse 142). 
KUMĀRILA BHATŢA 
25 
3. Kala (time), he says, is one, eternal and all-pervasive (ibid., p. 806). 
4. Regarding the existence of a subtler body, called Ativāhika- sharira, Kumarila thinks that the subtle body, endowed with all sorts of subtle forms, suddenly appearing at death to carry the Jiva away and disappearing at rebirth, is only an imaginary assumption. So thinks, he says, Vindhyarasin, an old Philosopher (ibid., p. 704), 
Tantravärtlika- This is a commentary on the Shabarabhāṣya, mainly in prose, and runs from Adhyāya I, Pada ii to the end of the Adhyaya III. This is an unique work which shows the deep scholarship of the author. Here Kumarila has shown his mastery over the other schools of thought as well. Below are given some of the noteworthy facts from this book: 
1. He believes in the creation and the dissolution of the universe (p. 28, Benares edition): 
2. His acquaintance with the non-Indian language is clear from the use of the following words : जर्भरी, तुर्फरी, नैताशन्, पर्फरिका, जेमनौ, मदेरू, मशयु etc. (ibid, p.65). 
3. Regarding the nature of Mimāmsā, he says-it is based upon the Vedas, upon ordinary 'experiences, and also upon direct Perception and Inference based upon these, and it has been reared up by an unbroken line of scientific teachers (p. 80.) 
4. Putting on of the sacred thread is a godly sign (p. 123). 
5. He quotes several instances showing the transgression of the rules of the Dharmashästra which were found even in his own days. Thus, he says- 
i) the Brahmants of Mathura and Ahicchatra drink wine; 
ii) the people of the North carry on the business of giving and accepting in gift, buying and selling lions, horses, mules, asses, camels and such other animals who have got two rows of teeth; 
iii) the people of the North are also used to cating in the same dish with their wives, children and friends; 
iv) the people of the South marry daughters of their maternal- uncles and partake of food while sitting on chairs; 
v) Besides, among the people of the North as well as of the South, a) partaking of food left by one's friends or relations, b) taking of betels touched by the people of all castes, c) the non- washing of the mouth after meals, d) wearing of clothes brought directly from the back of the washerman's ass, el and keeping in 
F. 4 
26 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMĀNJALI 
society.of people committing the greatest crimes, with the sole exception of killing a Brāhmaṇa were very common (ibid, page 183).. 6. Akasha, Dik, Kala, Atman and Paramanu are all eternal, like the Veda (p 236). 
7. He knew the Dravidian language so well that some have gone so far as to say that he was a Dravida (ride p. 157), which is, of course, not correct. He also finds fault with the use of the term Andhra, as used by Shabara and suggests that it should have been Dravida (p. 591). 
In the Shlokarārttika, Kumarila is found to differ from Shabara regarding the manifestation of sound (p. 786), and in the Tantra- varttika he says that Shabara has omitted the interpretation of six of the more important Sutras (pp. 915-16). 
Tuptika is the third part of his commentary on the Shabara- bhagya. It is very brief, and does not give us, like the first two parts, hosts of information or view-points. 
Kumarila's writings are all very lucid and his criticisms of the views of the opponents are quite convincing. He has, in both the Värttikas, shown enough originality of thought and interpre- tation. He has suggested many new lines for explaining the knotty points and has finally thrown aside all the objections of the Bud- dhist. Indeed, his contributions have been an unique one. We do not know as yet anything about the contents of his other works. 
Both the Varttikas have been translated into English for the first time by Dr. Ganganatha Jha and have been published in the Bibliotheca Indica Series. The Sanskrit text of the Shlokavārttika was first printed in the Kashividyāsudhānidhi, a Sanskrit Journal which used to be published from Benares. Then it was published along with the Nyayaratnakara of Parthasarathi Mishra in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. Then another incomplete edition of it has appeared along with the commentary called, Käshikā, of Sucarita Mishra, in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, Trivand- rum. Recently, another incomplete edition of it, along with the commentary of Bhatta Umbeka, called Tatparyatikā, has been published by the University of Madras in its Sanskrit Series. This commentary extends only up to the Sphotarada The Tantrav@rttika has been so far published twice, first in the Benares Sanskrit Series, Benares, and then in the Anandashrama Sanskrit Series, Poona. Both the editions are defective and it is very necessary to have an edition of this most important work with the help of all the available 
KUMARILA BHATTA 
27 
materials. The Tuptika was first published in the Benares Sanskrit Series, Benares, and then from Poona. 
It will not be out of place to mention that according to a manus- cript found in the State Library, Alwar, Kumarila, to the sorrow of all learned men, could not complete his Shlokavārttika and died. It was, therefore, at the instance of his patron Shiva, called Chatrapati, son of Shahaji of the family of Bhonsala, that Vishweshwara alias Gaga Bhatta, son of Dinakara, grandson of Ramakṛṣṇa, great- grandson of Bhatta Narayana, completed it. This work is known. as the Shivarkoday. 
Of the various commentaries on the Shlokararttika, the earliest is the Tatparyatika by Umbeka Bhaṭṭa It extends up to the Sphotavāda only. This has been recently published in the Madras University Sanskrit Series. It is held that Kumarila had a son, named Jaya Mishra, who wrote a commentary on his father's work in continuation of the work left unfinished by Umbeka. The only manuscript of it is with the Madras University which was discovered along with that of Mandana Mishra's work (vide Introduction to the Talparynţika by Umbeka, page V). But the most important com- mentaries on the Shlokararttika are the Kashika by Sucarita Mishra which has been partly published in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series and the Nyayaratnākara by Parthasarathi Mishra. The last has been published in full in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. This is the only good and complete commentary which is available to us on the Shlokavärttika. Although Kumarila had a long list of followers, yet we do not find that more than a few commentaries were written on his works Either some of them are lost and so we have not got them or there were only a few. 
The Tantravärttika which is his magnum opus, on the other hand, seems to have attracted a larger number of commentators. Thus, we have 1) Nyayasudha, generally known as the Ranaka, also called Sarvopaharini, by Someshwara Bhatta, son of Bhatta Madhava. It is the most popular commentary on the work. It has been published in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. 2) Bhāvārtha by Kamalakara Bhatta, son of Ramakṛṣṇa and Uma. This commentary was written in censure of the Ranaka (vide यस्तु राणकचौर्येण स्वपाण्डित्यं प्रकाशयन् । निनिन्द बहुभाषितत्वात् तस्य शिक्षेह तन्यते || मूर्खान् प्रतारयद्बालान् यः सिद्धान्तमनीनशत् । विन्यस्य तस्य शिरसि cură amares: ⇓ 3) Mitākṣarā by Gopala Bhaṭṭa. 4) Ajitā by 
28 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMĀNJALI 
Paritoșa Mishra, a Ms. copy of it is in Dr Jha's Library 5) Subodhani by Annam Bhaṭṭa, son of Tirumalacarya of the Raghava Somayājī family. It is also called Sudhādhārā and Ran kojjivant. 6) Nya- yapārāyaṇr by Gangadhara Mishra. 7) Parthasarathi Mishra also is said to have written a commentary on it, which has been referred to by Kṛṣṇadeva in his Tantrucuḍāmani. But it appears that it is the same as his Mimämsänyāyaratnamālā, and in that case, it cannot be called a commentary on the Tantrarārttika. But it is just possible that the name of his commentary on the Tantravārttika may be also the same; and if it is so, then it is a separate work. One Rāmānujācārya, quite different from the author of the Shribhāsya on the Brahmasutra, has written a commentary on this commentary of Parthasarathi, which is called Nayakaratna or Nyāyaratna. 8) The author of the Shastradipikā tells us that Mandana Mishra also wrote a commentary on the Tantravārttika (ride faqa #aruusàn, etc., II. i. 1, p. 101, Nirṇayasagara Press, Bombay Edition). 9) Bhava- deva Bhaṭṭa also wrote a commentary on it. 
Though the Tupțikā is not so important, yet it has attracted great scholars to write commentaries on it. The most important of which is the Tantraratna by Parthasarathi Mishra. This is a very elaborate commentary. It has been partly published in the Saras- watibhavana Sanskrit Text Series, Benares. The other one known so far is the Värttikābharana by Venkatesha of the 17th century. It seems that the Tupţika is also called Laghuvārttika. The other commentary on this Laghuvārttika is the Lghunyayasudhā, by Uttamashlokatirtha. 
Kumarila became so famous for his scholarship that he founded a school of his own with a large number of followers. 
PRABHAKARA MISHRA 
The more important, intelligent and independent interpreter of the Shabarabhasya is Prabhakara Mishra. He is generally called 'Guru'. He was, according to the ancient tradition, the pupil of Kumarila and many stories are current about his relation with Kumarila amongst the scholars (vide Text, pp. 15-16). There has been much controversy regarding this question in our own days. Sir Ganganatha Jha thinks that Prabhakara was senior to Kumārila and the two were perhaps contemporaries. The reasons are: 
PRABHAKARA MISHRA 
29 
1) Prabhakara's commentary called Bhatt is a comment on the Shabarabhagya in the strictest sense of the term. He has therein simply explained the Bhagya, and has nowhere criticised it; nor has he tried to criticise others' views mostly, while Kumārila has criticised Shabara in several places and has given his own original interpretation of several of the Sutras. It is felt that had Prabhā- kara written after Kumarila, he would have said something either in support of or against Kumarila's views. While Kumarila, on the other hand, is found to have refuted some of the views found in the Brhatt. 2) In point of style also Prabhakara shows distinct sigus of his being older than Kumarila. The style of Brhatt resembles that of Shabara in its natural grace, simplicity and directness (vide Text, pp. 15-20). But there are other scholars, such as Mm. Pt. Kuppuswami Shastri of Madras, who think that Prabhākara is a younger contemporary of Kumarila (vide Proceedings of the - Third Oriental Conference, 1924), and so Pt. Shastri has placed him between 610 and 690, while he has placed Kumarila between 600 and 660 (vide Introduction to the Brahmasiddhi, p. lviii). Dr. Jha is quite in agreement with Prof. Keith's view and has placed Prabhakara between 600 and 650. We do not know practically anything about his personal history. Pt Pashupatinatha Shastri agrees with Dr. Jha's view. 
• 
Prabhakara also, like his contemporary Kumarila, wrote a very faithful commentary on the Shabarabhāṣya, which is known as the Brhati. He became very famous and founded a school of his own in the system. His school came to be recognised as the Prabhākara School or the Guru School Both these two Mimaisakas-Bhatto and Guru-became so very prominent that they eclipsed the name and fame even of the great Jaimini and Shabara. In fact, these two became the founders of the two different schools of Pürva-Mīmainsa in much more systematized form. Almost the entire later Mimainsă literature came to be based on these two authors. Even those who coming after them wrote direct commentaries on the Jaiminiyasutras belonged to either of these two schools. Practically, the entire system of Pūrva-MImamsa became monopolised by these two schools; and henceforth, the system became for a few centuries split up into two-one as the Bhatta School and the other as the Prubhākara School, to which the third school was added by Murāri - Mishra 11, whose views are known as the Mishramata, in the 15th 
century. 
30 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMANJALI 
two commentaries on the 
Prabhakara wrote, it appears, Shabarabhaṣya-one is called Vivarana, also known as the Loghvi, while the other is called Bhatt, which is also known as the Nibandhana (vide Journal of Oriental Research, Madras, 1929, pp. 281-91). According to the Sarvadarsh nakaumudi by Madhava Saraswati (Ms. fol. 122), the Vivarana consists of only 6000 shlokas, while the Nibandhana consists of 12000 shlokas. Upon both these works, Shalikanatha Mishra has written his commentaries, which are named the Rjurimalā and the Dipashikha respectively. Of these two, the Brhaft is found up to the middle of Adhyaya VI only The Tarkapāda section of it has been published from Madras and Benares along with the jurimatā- Pañcikā. 
+ 
In the main body of the present text, Dr. Jha has given us the comparative views of both these two schools on almost all the topics and it is needless to dwell upon the same again here. So I will only," refer to some such points which have been noted by me in course of my studies and perhaps not included in the body of the text. They are: 
1. They believe in the determinate knowledge also (Eṛhati, p. 53, Madras Ed.) 
2. Sadɣshya - resemblance-is a distinct category (ibid, p. 107). 3. Inference and Analogy have been recognised as distinct means of cognition (ibid., pp 107-108'. 
4. Negation is not a distinct Pramāņa (ibid, p. 118). 
5. He believes in the theory of the Satkārya; for, according to him only Laukikas, that is, the Tärkik is, believe in the distinctive nature of cause and effect (ibid., p. 83). 
6. Cognition is self-valid. It does not require another means of cognition to support its validity (ibid, p 84). 
7. Motion is, according to Prabhakara, an object of Inference (श्रदृष्टस्वलक्षणविषयमनुमानमस्ति क्रियादिषु p. 98), so he differs from the Vaisbesika according to whom it is cognizable through direct percep- tion (vide— संख्या: परिमाणानि... कर्म च.. चाक्षुषाणि Vai. Su. IV. iii). 
8. Akti is a category and it depends upon the usage of an old man carried on through the methods of Agreement and Difference (grazzzfateur zfa) which requires the help of Pratyabhijñā (ibid, pp. 328-291. 
MANDANA MISHRA 
31 
References: 1) Prabhakara, JRAS, Bengal, Vol. IV, New Series. 2) Kumārila, JRAS, Bombay Branch, 1903, New Series. 3) Mm. Pt. Gopinatha Kaviraj's Introduction to the English Trans- lation of the Tantravarttika by Dr. Jha. 4) Pt. Ramaswami Shastri's Introduction to the Tattvabindu 5) Works of Prabhakara by Dr. T. R Chintamani, JOR, Madras, 1929. 6) Prābhākaras - Old and Newby Mr. Hiriyanna, JOR, Madras, 1931. 
MANDANA MISIRA 
Tradition, as current amongst the Sanskritists, makes Mandana Mishra a very great scholar of Purva-Mimamsa. According to the 
Purva-Mīmāṁsā. Sh nkaradigvijaya, he had his Shāstrārtha with the great Shankara who defeated the former and converted him to his own faith, and renamed him Sureshwarācārya, the famous author of the Vārtlikās. But this identity is still regarded as doubtful by many eminent scholars of the country. Even Dr. Jha himself is doubtful about this equation. But the difficulty to reject the tradition is that there is no definite proof against it. Thus, according to the tradition he was a Maithila Brahmaṇa who lived at Mahismul (the present Mahişī in the district of Bhagalpur). It is believed that at the time of his controversy with Shankara he was fairly old, while Shankara was only a youth. According to Anandagiri, he was the husband of Kumarila's sister; while, according to another tradition, he was a disciple of Kumarila. It appears from all these that he was a contemporary of both Kumarila and Shankara. Mm. Pt. S. Kuppuswami Shastri has fixed his date between 615 and 695 A.D. Pandita P. V. Kane, however, who does not believe in the Sureshwara and Mandana equation, has placed him between 690 and 710 (vide his History of the Dharmashastra, Vol. I., pp 252 64). 
Anyway, it is a fact that Mandana Mishra was a very great Mīmāmsaka of the Bhatta School. He was also recognised as a profound scholar of the Advaita school of Vedanta. The well- known work of his is the Brahmasiddhi which has been recently published from Madras. Amongst his contemporaries and, also later on, he had very great influence. 
His works on Mimamsa are: 1) Vidhiviveka where he discusses the import of the vidhi-lin. Here he refutes the standpoint of both Bhutta and Guru. It has been printed along with a commentary of32 
MĪMĀṀSĀ—KUSUMĀÑJALI 
Vacaspati Mishra I, called Nyayakaṇikā, from Benares. 2) Bhava- nāviveka. Here the author discusses the topic of Bhāvanā which is so very important in Mimaisa. This has been commented upon by Umbeka Both the text and Umbeka's commentary have been edited by Dr. Jha in the Saraswatibhavana Sanskrit Series, Benares. Regarding this Umbeka, the entire truth is still shrouded in mystery. I would simply refer to the very fine note on him by Dr. Jha in the introduction to the Bhāranāriveka. It has also been com- mented upon by Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa. 3) Vibhrama viveka, which deals with the five types of Khyatis, has been edited by Mm. S. Kuppuswami Shastri in the Journal of the Oriental Research, Madras. 4) Mimāṁsānukramaṇikā. It is in verse written Adhikarana-wise. This is a very useful book for recapitulating all the topics of the Adhikaranas of Pūrva-Mīmāmsā Its utility has been enhanced by the addition of an easy and elucidative running commentary called, Mimamsamanḍana, by Dr. Jha. has been published in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. 5) Sphoţasiddhi. It has been written, it seems, in defence of the theory of Sphota against the Varnarādins. Here the author even criticises the views of his own guru-Kumārila. As a Vedantin, Mandana is the author of 6) Brahmasiddhi. Upon this, Vacaspati I wrote his Brahmatattvasamikṣā which is perhaps lost for ever. The Brahm siddhi has been very recently published from Madras with a very elaborate Introduction by Mm. S. Kuppuswami Shastri. 7) Naiskarmyasiddhi which has been well edited by Prof. Hiriyanna in the Bombay Sanskrit Series. 8) The most important works are his two Värtlikas on the Bhagya of Shankaracarya on the Brha- dāranyaka and the Taittiriya Upanisads. 
It 
Almost all the works of Mandana are quite stiff and it becomes difficult to follow him easily. Fortunately, we have got fine com- ments on almost all his works. 
References: i) Introductions to his published works, specially to the Brahmasiddhi, and ii) Introduction to Umbeka's commen- 
tary. 
UMBEKA 
Umbeka was a great Mīmāṁsaka. He has been identified with Mandana Mishra by Vidyaranya in his Shankaradigvijaya (VII. 111- 117) where it is said that Umbeka was the popular name of Mandana 
UMBEKA 
33 
(अयञ्च पन्था यदि ते प्रकाश्यः सुधीश्वरो मण्डनमिश्रशर्म्मा । दिगन्तविश्रान्तयशो विजेयो यस्मिन् जिते सर्वमिदं जितं स्यात् ॥... उम्बेक इत्यभिहितस्य हि तस्य giderdia zimemfuata, etc.). Again, in support of this we have the statement of Pratyagrupa Bhagavat ':' (vide his commentary on the Citsukhi, p. 265, Nirnayasagara Press, Bombay Edition); and lastly, we have the famous verse-aff, etc., of Bhavabhuti in place of the Mangalacaranu in this comment- ary on the Shlokavārttika. But against this there are strong arguments to disprove the equation. Thus-i) we cannot always rely upon the shankarudigvijaya; ii) Citsukhācārya in the same breath refers to both Bhavabhuti and Umbeka (fe 
न पुरात एव सन्नाटकनाटिकादिप्रबन्धविरचनमात्रेणानासो भवति भवभूतिः, उक्तं #g, etc., p. 265) which shows that Citsukha knew them to be two different persons; iii) Umbeka has commented upon the Bha- vanāviveka of Mandana Mishra. In this commentary in several places Umbeka notes differences in readings (vide pp. 17, 28, 63, 77, 81, 82), and in three cases, at least, he prefers only one of the readings and rejects the other (wide pp. 28 - स साधुरेव; 77 - इति तु समीचीनः पाठः; 
82). Now, had Umbeka been the same as Mandana, the author of the text, then there was no ground for any such references to and preferences in the readings; iv) Regarding the so-called Mangala verse, it is enough to say that there is no point in having that verse in any form in the beginning of his Com- mentary. Some one by mistake might have put it there, and which the later scribes or editors have preserved. Hence, it is needless to try to establish any equation between these two writers. Similarly, the view that he had relations with Kumarila or Prabhakara cannot be supported on any sound reasoning. 
Umbeka wrote a commentary, called Tatparyațikā, on the Shlokavārttika extending up to the Sphotavādu It is generally brief and quite elucidative It refers to सांख्यनायक- माधव (p. 112), वृत्तिकार and उपवर्ष (p. 123 ), विशाखिल (p 179), भर्त्रीश्वरादयः (p. 38 ), वैद्याचार्य (p. 39 ) and दिङ्नाग, etc He denies सत्कार्यवाद (p. 48 ), कारणगुणप्रक्रमेण कार्ये गुणारम्भ (p. 49), प्रामाण्यं नाम परिच्छेदोत्पादिका शक्तिः 
परिच्छेदोत्पादिका शक्तिः (p. 49), बोधकत्वं नाम प्रामाण्यं (p. 50), बोधात्मकत्वमात्रं प्रामाण्यं (p. 50), श्रोत्रवृत्तिरेव शब्द fa (p. 130), etc. It has been published in the Madras University Sanskrit Series. Its Introduction is quite good. His 
F. 5 
34 
MĪMĀṀSĀ—KUSUMĀÑJALI 
another work is a commentary on the Bhavanaviveka of Maṇḍana. It has been published in the Princess of Wales Saraswatibhavana Texts Series. It is a good commentary and explains the terse language of Mandana very well In this, several Karikas from Bhatt-pada are quoted. In one place he says that Akasha is not imperceivable and that it is perceived has been already made clear before ( न त्वप्रत्यक्षत्वं नभः, तत्प्रत्यक्षत्वस्य प्रागेव प्रतिपादितत्वात् - p. 85). Again, he says that Akasha is the substrate (p. 27). 
SHALIKANATHA MISHRA 
Shalikanatha Mishra is generally believed to be the direct disciple of Prabhakara. The only reason advanced in support of this is that he, in several places, says ':'. But the reason is not at all convincing; for had he been a direct pupil he would have named his guru quite in a diffirent way. He must have added to Prabhakara's name some word showing due reverence to his guru; while here in the benedictory verse of the Ṛjuvimalā, he only says—“AHE|H: THIGH”. So the relation that they want to establish is not free from doubts. According to Pandit Ramaswami Shastri and Mm. S. Kuppuswami Shastri, Vacaspati Mishra I quotes from the Rjuvimalā-Pañcikā (vide Introduction to the Tattvabindu, p. 48) of Shalikanatha Mishra. It being so, we can easily place him before the 9th century; and hence, he cannot be a contemporary of Udayanacarya as Mm. Pandit Gopinatha Kaviraj thinks (vide Saraswatibhavana Studies, Vol. VI, pp. 167-68). Shalikanatha himself quotes two verses from the Vidhiviveka (pp. 243, 302) in his Prakaraṇapañcikā (p 178). So, he must have lived after Mandana and before Vacaspati Mishra I No more about him we know. Again, if the term Gaudamimāṁsaka (vide Udayanācārya's Kusumāñjaliprakaraṇa, p. 466, Biblio. Ed.) really refers to Shalikanatha as the author of the Pañcikā, as inter- preted by Varadarāja Mishra, in his Bodht on the Kusumañjali (p. 123), then we can say that he belonged to the province of Ganda which at that time extended even beyond Bengal. 
He is the author of the two commentaries on the commentaries of Prabhakara, namely, Dīpashikhā on the Laghvi and the Ṛjuvimalā- pañcika on the Brhati. He himself makes a reference to these two commentaries, which he names the Puscikādvaya, in his third work, the Prakaraṇapañcikā (p. 46). All his commentaries 
VACASPATI MISHRA I 
35 
are called Pañcika, which led people to call him as the Pañcikākāra. Of these three Pañcikās, the Ṛjuvimalā-Pañcikā has been partly printed along with the Brhati from Madras and Benares. The Prakarana Pañcika has been published long ago from Benares; while the Dipashikha is still unpublished. Prakaraṇa-Pañcikā is a very important work on the Prabhakara School. It gives us the views of the school on almost every topic. In fact, it is indispen- sable for the comprehensive study of the Prabhakara school. Its language is simple and lucid. Simplicity and lucidity are really the most important characteristics of Shalikanatha's writings. A commentary on the Prakaraṇa-Pañcikā was partly published by the late Pandit Kinjawadekara of Poona But for his Ṛjuvimală, the Brhat would have remained mostly unintelligible. There is another work, called Mimāṁsābhāṣyaparishista, which is also attributed to Shalikanatha Mishra (ride Introduction to the Tattvabindu). 
VACASPATI MISHRA J 
The renowned author of the Bhamati on the Shankarabhāṣya on the Brahmasutra was also a great Mimamisaka. He was a versatile scholar and wrote commentaries on almost every school of thought. Panditas are also of opinion that he wrote on the six non- orthodox schools also. About his personal history we have simply to depend upon the traditions current amongst the Panditas who hold that he was an inhabitant of Mithila. Trilocana was his guru. A king named Nrga was his patron (vide the end of the Bhāmati). This king, they say, ruled over Mithila before the Kārnāṭaka king Nanyadeva, about 1019 A.D He had no issue and in order to perpetuate the memory of his wife, he named his commentary after her name- Bhāmatṛ Ratnakarti, a Buddhist logician, author of the Apohasiddhi and the Kṣaṇabhanga-siddhi-small treatises, refers to Trilocana's views (vide Six Buddhist Nyaya Tracts, pp. 13 and 58 and 70 respectively). He also refers to Vacaspati (vide Kṣaṇabhangasiddhi, p. 58). Now, according to Mm. Haraprasada Shastri, Ratnakīrti lived before 983 A.D. So both Trilocana and Vacaspati must have lived long before 983 A. D. Vacaspati himself, in bis Nyāyasūcīnibandha, says that this work was composed in 898, that is, 841 A.D. · 
His well-known work on Mimaisa is his commentary on the Vidhiviveka, called Nyāyakaṇikā, which was wrongly taken to be a 
36 
MĪMĀMSĀ KUSUMĀÑJALI 
Nyaya work by the late Mm. Dr. Satishcandra Vidyabhuṣaṇa. Although Vacaspati mostly wrote commentaries, except the Tattva- bindu, yet he has shown ample originality in almost every comment- ary He has given us his own independent views on almost all the systems. So, he is generally called सर्वतन्त्रस्वतन्त्र and also द्वादशदर्शन- टीकाकार. 
He discusses in the Nyayakaṇikā many important philosophical topics, such as, the Satkāryavāda where he gives about seven reasons in support of it, the Asatkaryavāda, the Khyātis, validity of dream- cognition, Tamas as a substance, and several Buddhist topics. According to him, Mandana Mishra refers to the views of the old followers of Prabhakara in several places [जरत्प्राभाकरमतमुपन्यस्यति (p. 96), Gregrarexieftari gàda: (p. 109)], which indicates that Prabhā- kara must have lived long before Mandana, and consequently, before Kumarila also, if his relations with Mandana be accepted as valid. In the Tattvabindu, which is an independent work of his,. he mainly discusses the processes of the Shābdabodha according to various schools and he himself closely follows the view-point of the Bhatta school. It is needless to mention that he is equally authori- tative in almost every system of thought. 
Nyāyakanikā bas been commented upon by Parameshwara (vide Mss. Cat. No. 10606, Oriental Library, Govt. of Madras). Both of his works have been published. 
DEVASWAMI AND SUCARITA MISHRA 
We do not know more about Devaswami. That he wrote a commentary on the Shabarabhāṣya is known to us from the Prapanca- hrdaya. He is also believed to have written on the Sankarṣakāṇḍa There is a manuscript of it even with Dr. Jha, but we are not yet sure that the text of the Sonkarṣakāṇḍa is quite genuine. As the Prapancahṛdaya is believed to be a work of the 11th century, it may be easily said that Devaswami must have lived before the eleventh century. 
Sucarita Mishra is another important Mimamsaka. 
Mīmāṁsaka. He is known to us as the famous writer of the commentary, called Kashika, on the Shlokavärttika. In certain aspects it is more elucidative than the Nyayaratnākara of Parthasarathi Mishra. Rāmakṛṣṇa Bhatta, the author of a commentary on the Shastradīpikā (pp. 30, 47), 
PÂRTHASARATHI MISHRA 
37 
Pratyagrupa Bhagavan (1400), Vedanta Deshikācārya (13th century) refer to Sucarita Mishra and his work. A manuscript of this Kashika belonging to the Saraswatibhavana Library, Benares, is dated Samvat 1507, that is, 1450 A.D. So, he may be placed some- time in the beginning of the 12th century. A portion of this commentary has been published in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series. He is believed to have flourished in Mithila. 
Ramakrsna in his Siddhāntacandrika says 'वार्त्तिकानुसारेण विधिस्वरूपं निरुपितं सुचरितमिश्रैः' ( pp. 47, 48 ). Does this indicate that Sucarita Mishra wrote separately a treatise, named faff from Kumārila's point of view? 
PARTHASARATHI MISHRA 
Parthasarathi Mishra was perhaps the most important writer on Mimamsă after Kumārila and Prabhakara. Just as Shalikanatha Mishra was a devoted follower of Prabhakara and elucidated the latter's views in his works, so Parthasarathi Mishra was devoted to Kumarila and explained the entire Shastra according to Kumārila in his works. Although Parthasarathi is devoted to Kumārila mainly, yet he was equally well versed in both the schools ride श्रविभक्तविभक्तमार्गयोर्मतयोर्भट्ट गुरूपदिष्टयोः । (उभयोरपि पार्थसारथि : प्रथितोथाता थ (?) मतेऽभियोगवान् — नायकरन Ms. on न्यायरत्नमाला ) ]. He was most likely a native of Mithila. He tells us at the end of his Nyāyaratnumālā that he learnt the Shastra from his father Yajnatman who was a great scholar (भुवनत्रयविख्यात श्रीमद्यज्ञात्मनन्दनः । तत एव श्रुतं प्राप्य विश्रुत: पार्थसारथि:- :-p. 212). Nothing more is known to us about his personal 
history. 
As I have already said in my Introduction to the Mimāṁsā- shāstrasarvasva of Halayudha that there are two kinds of commen- taries on the Jaiminīyasūtras: 1) The first type of commentary, however brief it may be, is a running commentary on almost each and every Sutra. It is represented by the commentaries of Shabara, Prabhakara and Kumarila and others 2) The second type of commentary is that which runs only on the main Sutra of each and every section (Adhikarana), and, by the way, gives the substance of other Sutras included under that section. This kind of commentary is more popular. Perhaps the earliest commentary of this type is that of Parthasarathi Mishra, namely, Shastradipika. This is a very 
38 
MIMĀMSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
important work on Mimamsa on the lines of Kumarila. There is hardly any other work of its merit on this system. 
He has been referred to by Pratyagrupa Bhagavan (1400) in his commentary on the Citsukhĩ, by Madhavācārya in his Nyāyamālāvis- tara and Vivaraṇaprameyasangraha, and by Cidānanda Paṇḍita of the 13th century. Besides, I have shown in my Introduction to the Mimāmsāshāstrasarvasva of Halayudha (pp. 30-31) that the latter has quoted freely from the Nyayaratnakara and Shastradipika of Parthasarathi; and as Halayudha was the Raja-Pandit of king Lakṣmaṇasena of Bengal who ruled over it from 1170 to circa 1200 A. D., Parthasarathi Mishra must have lived long before Halayudha and can easily be placed in the 10th century A. D. (ibid., p. 31). Dr. Surendranatha Dasgupta has placed Parthasarathi in the 9th; while Mm. Pandit G. N. Kavirajaji has placed him in the 13th. But to me their conclusions do not seem to be final. 
He has written several standard works. They are mentioned here in the same order in which they were written: 1) Nyāyaratna- mālā. This is an independent treatise on certain important topics of Mimäinsa. The first chapter deals with the adhyayanavidhi in 43 verses with a very lucid and elaborate explanatory prose com- ments of his own on each verse. The second chapter deals with the Svataḥprāmāṇyanirṇaya. I do not think there is any other standard book where this topic has been so well discussed. He has carefully examined almost all the then existing views on the topic and has given his own Siddhanta. In fact, he has removed all possible misunderstandings against the theory of the self-validity of know- ledge; so he himself says 'व्याख्याविवादसञ्जातमोहव्यावृत्तये कृतः '. The third chapter is on Vidhinirnaya. Here he quotes from Mandana Mishra in support of his own statements. The fourth deals with the theory of Vyapti. He discusses the views of almost all other schools and then establishes his own Siddhanta that it is the Niyama which establishes the relation between the Linga and the Lingin. The fifth chapter discusses the import of proposition. The sixth deals with the difference between Nitya and Kamya actions. Then in the remaining five chapters he discusses the various aspects of Angatva (auxiliary nature of the acts). The book is well written and the author is very humorous throughout. He is very bold in his assertions. 
There are a few points from this book worthy of being noted here: 1 He believes that a substance is porous and that the 
PARTHASARATHI MISHRA 
. 
39 
chemical action takes place in the composite (Pitharapaka), which is clear from the following 'काष्ठेभ्यस्तैजसाः परमाणवः समुद्रताः स्थाल्युंदरमनुप्र- fagraraugura fash' (p. 144). 2) Manas cannot come in contact with things outside the organism (p. 59). 3) He believes in four kinds of contact संयोग, संयुक्तसमवाय, संयुक्तसमवेतसमवाय, and समवाय. Again, the contact is either due to Karman or another contact. He also believes in the ajasumyoga (eternal contact). 
He mentions in this book Maṇḍana Mishra and quotes from his Vidhiviveka, Tikākārupādāḥ, Vivaraṇakāra and Nibandhakāra (p. 148); and from his writing it is clear that the Vivaraṇakāra is different from the Nibandhakāra (p. 148). Rāmānujācārya, the author of the Tanti arahasya of the 18th century, has written a com- mentary, named Nāyakaratna, on it. 
2) The second work of his is the Tantraratna which has been partly edited by Dr. Jha and myself for the Saraswatibhavana Sanskrit Text Series, Benares. This is although a commentary on the Tupţikā of Kumārila, yet in fact, it explains mostly the lines of Shabarabhāṣya in it, as has been made clear in the foot-notes given by me in the first Part. It is very lucid and elaborate in its exposition and a study of it is essential for every student of Mimāsā as Dr. Jha tells us in his brief Prefatory Note. As the author himself says - ' इति न्यायमालायां दर्शितम्' (vide Tantra- ratna, Pt. I, p. 9), it must have been written after the Nyayaratna- mālā. So it cannot be the earliest production of the author as Pandit Ramaswami Shastri says (vide his Introduction to the Tattvabindu, p. 61) 
3) His next and the most important work is the Shāstradīpikā. It is a commentary on the Jaiminiyasūtras adhikaraṇa-wise. It is the first work known to us which elucidates the views of Kumārila on Mimamsa. The treatment of the subject has been made easier by separating the five well-known constituents of an adhikarana ( विषयः संशयश्चैव पूर्वपक्षस्तथोत्तरम् । निर्णयश्चेति पञ्चाङ्गं शास्त्र- sferatu fag:). He gives us the substance of the entire adhikaraṇa in a few verses in the beginning of each adhikarana and then elucidates the same in very easy prose. His style and language both are marked with simplicity and humour. In a way, it has surpassed the importance of the previous works on the Shastra and has become a model work for the later writers. Its importance can easily be imagined from the fact that it has attracted a large 
40 
MĪMĀMSA KUSUMANJALI 
number of scholars of name and fame to write commentaries on it It is so very comprehensive that by studying this single book one can perfectly understand all that the school of Kumarila has con- tributed to the Shastra. He has criticised the views of Prabhakara from time to time. He discusses very clearly the views of other schools of thought before giving his own Siddhānta. 
He refers to Maṇḍana Mishra, his own Nyāyaratnamālā and Tantraratna, Shankarabhāṣya on the Brahmasutra and the Bhag - vadrāmāyaṇa (p. 87, Nirnayasagara, Bombay Edition). 
The following are some of the more noteworthy views of his : 
i) The four external sense-organs, namely, ghrāṇa, rasanā, cakṣus and tvak are products of the ultimate particles of earth, water, fejas and vāyu respectively. The auditory-organ, however, is the Dik. 
ii) Manas, which is either of the nature of one of the bhutas or something different from these, is not self-dependent in cognising the external objects (vide मनस्तु पृथिव्यांदीनामेवान्यतमात्मकं तेभ्योः न्यद्वा -ibid., p. 36). Its function, in cases of memory, is due to Samskāra (disposition). It is, however, Svatantra (free) only in relation to the qualities of the individual-self (ibid., p. 36). 
iii) He believes both in the determinate and indeterminate knowledge (ibid., p. 40). 
iv) He says that according to the Mimärisakas a syllogism consists of three factors alone-either the first three or the last three factors of the Nyaya-syllogism (ibid., p. 64). 
v) Cognition is inferential (ibid., pp. 56-57). 
vi) Shabda is divided into Pauruşeya which is called the Aptavākya, and Apauruseya which is the Vedavakya Both, being free from the defects of being spoken of by an unreliable authority, are valid-self-valid (ibid, p. 72). 
vii) As against the view of the Naiyayikas, he believes that Samyog, existing between any two objects, is not one but two (ibid., p. 103). 
viii) Shakti is a separate category. It has Atman as its sub- strate in the case of sacrifices (ibid., p. 80). 
ix) Between a Jati (universal) and a Vyakti (individual) there is the relation of difference-cum-identity (cf. ferada yenu, ibid, p. 100). So is the case with a composite (avayavi) and its constituents also. Thus, a composite represents only a different state of the constituents and is not different from the latter (cf. 
PARTHASARATHI MISHRA 
41 
वयं तु भिन्नाभिनत्वम् उभयात्मकत्वम् । तस्मादवयवानामेवावस्थान्तरमवयवी न —ibid., p. 106). The constituents, however, due to their peculiar combination, appear before us as one composite, and so a particular object thus produced is one, but with reference to its constituents it is also many (ibid., p. 107). 
x) The view that the qualities present in a cause produce the qualities in the effect, as held by the Nyaya-Vaisheşika, is not recognised by Parthasarathi Mishra; for, he holds that the quality present in the effect is not at all different from the same quality present in its cause. For instance, it is the very colour of the threads which appears as the colour of the cloth and so there is no causal relation between these (ibid., p. 107). 
xi) He does not believe in the variagate-colour (citrarūpa) as a distinct form of colour (ibid.). 
xii) The Prapanca (world) is not merely illusory (ibid., p. 110). xiii) The Atman is not self-luminous (svaprakāsha); for, if it were so, then the self-luminosity would have been manifest even in the state of sound sleep (suşupti), which is not the fact (ibid., p. 124). 
xiv) Mokşa has been defined as the destruction of the contact of the Atman with the Prapanca existing in the form of a physical organism, sense-organs and objects of bhoga. It is said to be free from any relation or contact with anything and also it is without bliss (cf. famed faucibid., pp. 128-29). As there is the de- struction of pain in it, it is also regarded as a Puruṇārtha (ibid). 
xv) During the state of final emancipation the Atman is not associated with the Manas (of मुक्तस्य मनसोऽभावात् श्रमनस्कत्वश्रुतेः- ibid., p. 130). 
xvi) Kala (Time) is not cognised by any of the external sense- organs independently, but only as an attribute of the sense-objects in course of the cognition of the objects through the various sense- organs (ibid., p. 139). 
It has been commented upon by several standard authors; for instance, 1) Somanatha, whose commentary is called Mayükhamā- likā; 2) Appayya Dıkṣita, whose commentary is named Mayükhāvalī; 3) Rajacuḍamaņi Drksita, whose commentary is called Karpura- varttikā· 4) Dinakara Bhaṭṭa ; 5) Yajñaṇārāyaṇa, whose commentary is named Prabhamandala; 6) Anubhavananda Yat of the 17th 
F. 642 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMANJALI 
century, whose commentary also is named Prabhamandala"; 7) Campakanatha, whose commentary is called Prakasha; 8) Vaidya- natha Bhatta, whose commentary is named Prabha; 9) Ramakṛṣṇa, whose commentary is known as Siddhantacandrika, also called Yuktisnehaprapurant and Gūḍhārthavivaraṇa, on the Tarkapāda only; 10) Shankara Bhatta, son of Nārāyaṇa, whose commentary also is named Prakasha; 11) Kamalakara Bhaṭṭa, whose commentary is called Aloka; 12) Nārāyaṇa Bhatta, father of Shankara Bhatta, the author of the Prakasha; 13) Bhimacarya; 14) and Sudarshanācārya, whose commentary extending only up to the end of the Tarkapāda is called Prakasha. Of these, the commentary of Ramakṛṣņa appears to be the earliest, as he himself says in the beginning verses of his. commentary that no one had written any commentary on it before him. (vide न शास्त्रदीपिकाटीका कृता केनापि सूरिया । तदपूर्वाध्वसञ्चारी नोपहास्यः स्खलन्नपि), 
ft), This commentary is indeed very lucid, elaborate, and infor- mative. The Mayukhamālikā and the Siddhantacandrika along with the Gudharthavivarana have been published from the Nirnayasāgara Press, Bombay. There have been several editions of this work. The first and complete edition of it was published by E. J. Lazarus and Co., Benares. This contains only the text. It was edited by the late Mm. Pandita Rama Mishra Shastrr, Professor, Government Sanskrit College, Benares. He has given a very good introduction and very brief foot-notes here and there. Then came the best edition along with the two commentaries from the Nirnayasagara Press, Bombay. Then there is the edition of Pandita Sudarshanacarya along with his own commentary called Prakasha extending up to the end of the Tarkapada. In this edition the author has given a few points of similarity and dissimilarity between the schools of Kumarila and Prabhakara. Another edition of the Tarkapāda alone along with the Siddhantacandrika has been brought out from Benares. 
(4) His last work is the famous commentary on the Shlokaväārt- tika, called Nyāyaratnākara, a name which is so popular amongst the Mimamsakas. It is one of the best commentaries, Besides explaining the lines of the text, it explains the views of the orthodox and the non-orthodox schools very clearly before giving his own criticism of their views. His language is marked by simplicity and lucidity. This is his last work. He refers to his own works Nyayaratnamālā and Shastradipika very often. He has also 
BHAVANATHA MISHRA 
43 
referred to the Bṛhaṭṭikā by Kumārila (p. 452). He also refers to Bhavadasa, Dharmakirti, Bhiksu, Dinnaga and Bhartṛmitra. It has been published along with the text in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. Except the Tantraratna which is only partly published, all the rest of his works have been published. 
BHAVANATHA MISHRA 
. 
Bhavanatha Mishra, also known as Bhavadeva Mishra (vide Varadaraja's Commentary on the Viveka, verse 10 of his benediction), was a great advocate of the Prabhakara School. The only work of his known to us is his Nayaviveka which is now partly published from the Madras University along with the commentary of Varada- raja. It is an independent commentary on the Jaiminiyasutras. The author does not indulge in any literary show or criticism against the rival views (cf. विहाय विस्तरं शब्दसौन्दर्यपरनिन्दने । व्यज्यते भवनाथेन acaufaaca:). The author follows the trend of thought of Shalikaṇatha Mishra as found in the latter's two Panjikās (vide-· i) महता प्रणिधानेन... शालिकोक्तं प्रसाध्यते; ii) पञ्जिकाद्वयतन्त्रार्थसम्मोहविनिवृत्तये । उद्याहिणी भवेनैषा etc.). 
The Viveka is indeed the masterpiece of the author. Though it is very lucid and elaborate, yet it is not so easy, and in many places it is quite obscure without the help of a commentary. Amongst many others, he refers to Shalikanatha, Vacaspati Mishra I and Shrikara. Candra, a MImāinsaka of the 11th century (vide Dr. Umesha Mishra's article in the Jha Commemoration Volume, pp. 245-46), Murāri Mishra II of the 12th century (vide Dr. Umesha Mishra's Introduction to the Ekadashadyādhikaraṇa, Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Vol. X, pp. 235-37, 1929), Pratyagrupa Bhagavat of the 14th century and many other's refer to Bhavanatha and his Nayaviveka. This being so, we may place our author before the 11th century and just after Parthasarathi Mishra. This disproves the view advanced by some that the author of the Viveka and the father of Shankara Mishra of the 15th century are identical. No doubt, Shankara Mishra's father was also a Mimamsaka but he was quite different from the author of the Viveka. He was an inhabitant of Mithila. 
The importance of this work can be easily gathered from the fact that there are several commentaries on this work. Thus, 1) Dipikā by Varadaraja,, son of Ranganatha, grandson of Devanatha 
44 
MIMĀṀSĀ—KUSUMĀÑJALI 
and great-grandson of Prapatartihara who was living on the bank of the river named Shuki. His teacher was named Sudarshana. It extends up to the Tripädi section only. Part of it has been now published from the Madras University; 2) Shankādīpikā by a pupil of Ramarya and Govindopadhyaya (vide Hall; p. 180); 3) Alan- kāra by Damodara Suri, son of Madhava Yogin (vide Benares Sanskrit College Mss. Cat.); 4) Vivekatattva by Ravideva of the 14th century; and Pañcikā by Shankara. Except the Dipikā all are unpublished so far. 
GURUMATACARYA CANDRA 
Mahamahopadhyaya Candra was a follower of the Prabhakara School. He has made original contribution also to the thought. He was the son of Mahopadhyaya Gunarati who was a native of Mithila. He was held with great respect by later writers. Murari Mishra II of the 12th century refers to his views in his Tripädīnītinayanaṁ, Candeshwara Thakkura, the great Maithila Nibandhakāra, of the 14th century, speaks of him as Gurumatācāryaḥ, Shankara Mishra of the 15th century refers to him as Prabhakaraikadeshiyaḥ in his Vadivinoda (p. 53), Jayarama Bhaṭṭācārya gives us his views in his Nyāyasiddhantamālā. From all these references it appears that he must have lived before 1100 A. D. 
His works known to us on Mimamsa are: 1) Nayaratnākara a commentary on the Jaiminiyasutras. Only a portion of this com- mentary is with the writer. The style of this commentary is simple. 2) Amytabindu-an independent treatise on Mīmāṁsā. A manuscript of it is in the Adyar Library and also with the writer. Candra, amongst so many others, refers to Shrikara, Viveka, Vivaraṇa and Panjikā. He believed in eleven categories, namely, substance (dravyu), qualities (guna), action (karman), generality (sāmānya), number (sankhya), inherence (samavāya), resemblance (sadrshya), energy (shakti), in common with others of the Prabhakara School, while succession (krama), auxiliary (upakara), and impression (sathskāra) as his own independent addition to the above-mentioned eight categories (vide Dr. Umesha Mishra's article in the Jha Commemoration Volume.) 
BHAVADEVA BHATTA 
Bhavadeva Bhatta alias Balavalabhtbhujanga was a follower of the Bhatta School. His native place was perhaps Bengal. 
MURARI MISHRA ÎI 
45 
Mr. Kane has placed his date about 1100 A. D. He has written several works on the Dharmashastra. On Mimams, the only work known to us is his commentary on the Tantravārttika, called Tauta- timatatilaka. Tutata was a pet name of Kumarila. This is not yet published. 
. 
SOMESHWARA BHATTA ALIAS RĀŅAKA 
Someshwara Bhaṭṭa was regarded as a rival of Parthasarathi Mishra in the field of Purva-MImāṁsā by later writers. He was the son of Madhava Bhaṭṭa. He was indeed a great Mimaisaka and his views have been very often quoted though sometimes very adversely criticised also. His Nyāyasudhā, also known as Sarvo- pakāriņi, Sarvānavadyakāriṇī, or only Ranaka, is a very important commentary on the Tantravärttika. It is very lengthy. Some- times, it indulges into literary shows also. Kamalakara Bhatta (1612 A.D.) calls him a plagiarist (Rāṇakacaurya) in his own com- mentary on the Tantravärttika. It has been published in Chow- khamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. His another work, the Tantra- sāra, referred to by himself in his Nyāyasudhā, is not yet published. He is placed about 1100 A. D. 
PARITOSA MISHRA 
Paritosa Mishra was an inhabitant of Mithila. He is the author of a commentary named Ajitā or Tantraṭīkānibandhana on the Tantravārttika. It is easier and perhaps more useful to the readers for understanding the Varttika, but unfortunately it is still unpub- lished. The author is an old writer and is generally placed in the 12th century. Anatanarayana Mishra, son of Suryaviṣṇu Mishra of the 14th century, wrote a commentary called Vijaya on the Ajitā. It was therefore that the title of Ajitācārya was given to Ananta- nārāyaṇa. He was also a Maithila. Its Ms. is in the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute and also in the Library of Dr. Ganga- natha Jha. 
MURARI MISHRA II 
'मुरारेस्तृतीयः पन्थाः ' has become a proverb in Sanskrit which has got its origin in Murari Mishra II. He was one of the greatest Mimarhsakas who held independent views on several topics of Purva- Mimämsä. His views were so distinct and convincing that he was 
46 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMANJALI 
regarded as the founder of the Third School of Purva-Mīmāṁsā. Although he held distinct views on several topics of Mimaisā, yet perhaps it was due to his having an independent view on the theory of the Validity of Knowledge (AT) that he became known as the founder of the Third School (vide Murari Mishra's distinctive views by Dr. Umesha Mishra). 
It will not be out of place to state that the MImamsakas in general are the supporters of the theory of the Self-Validity of Knowledge (स्वतः प्रामाण्यवाद ), while the Naiyayikas in general are the upholders of the Purataḥ Prāmāṇyavāda. But when we very care- fully examine the views of both Kumarila and Prabhakara, we find that truly speaking the viewpoint of Prabhakara alone is the sup- porter of the Svataḥ Prāmānya theory. Kumarila's viewpoint is somewhat different from the former. Murari Mishra's view is, however, different from both these two, and as he was a great Naiya- yika, his view is slightly influenced by that system (vide Dr. Umesha Mishra's article in the Proceedings of the Oriental Con- ference, Lahore). 
Only a few years back his views were known only from refer- ences found here and there. But fortunately, I could discover two small, though very important, fragments of his commentary on the Jaiminiyasūtras in 1928. They are 1) Tripädinitinayanaṁ and 2) Ekādashādyādhikaranam. The former is a commentary-adhika- rana-wise on Adhyaya I, Padas 2 to 4; while the latter deals with the Tantra and Avapa which form part of the first adhikarana of the 11th Adhyaya of the Jaiminiyasutras. Both of these frag- ments have been printed now. In both there are references to Vivarana, Viveka, Pañjika and Paribhasa and to authors Candra, Bhanga, Vindhyavāsin, Nandana and Shrikara. These are, un- doubtedly, old works and authors. As he refers to the Pañjika and Candra, he must have lived after Shalikanātha and Caudra. Again, he himself is referred to by Vardhamana, son of Gangesha Upadh- yaya, in several of his works; and as Vardhamana is placed in the 13th century, Murari must be placed before him. So I have placed him between the 11th and the 12th centuries. Dr. Jha has given his views in the text, so it is needless for me to repeat them here. 
HALAYUDHA BHATTA 
Halayudha Bhatta, the author of several works bearing the com- mon name Sarvasva, was a court Pandita of king Laksmanasena of 
NANDISHWARA, CIDANANDA, AND GANGADHARA MISHRA 47 
Bengal who ruled over the country from 1170 to 1200 A.D. This helps us to fix the date of Halayudha about this very period. He was the son of Dhananjaya and Jani of the Vätsyāyana-gotra. He had two elder brothers-Pashupati and Ishana. The only work of his on Mimaisa is the Mimamsa-shāstra-sarvasva. It is an adhikarana-wise commentary on the Jaiminiyasutras. Up to the end of the Pada iv, Chapter III, it has been edited by me in the Bihar and Orissa Research Society Journal, and it is difficult to say whether the work was complete or left at this place. 
This work is very disappointing. It appears from our studies that the author did not exert in the least to write it himself. In fact, as I have already said in its introduction that the author has copied down verbatim et litteratim in almost every adhikaraṇa either from the Shastradīpikā or the Tantravärttika. Although he is regarded as a 'very great writer in Bengal on Mımāṁṣā, yet I do not see any utility of a work like this in any branch of learning. 
NANDISHIWARA, CIDANANDA, AND GANGADHARA MISHRA These three writers must have lived before the 14th century. NandIshwara, the author of the Prabhākaravijaya, published from the Sanskrit Sahitya Parisad, Calcutta, is a follower of the Prabhakara School. This is a good compendium of the Prabhakara School. He refers to two Nathas, perhaps Shalikanatha and Bhavanatha, in the beginning of the book upon whom he has based his Vijaya (vide नाथद्वयात्तसारेऽस्मिञ्छास्त्रे मम परिश्रमः ). 
Cidananda Pandita is the author of the Nititattvavirbhāva which is not yet published. The work, however, seems to be important; for, there exists a very good commentary on it by Para- meshwara, a standard writer. He discusses about 44 Vadas in it and everywhere he follows the treatment of Kumarila. He belonged to the South. 
Gangadhara Mishra was a Maithila. He lived in a village named Simari. He was the son of Bhatta Someshwara. The only work of his on MImamsa known to us is a commentary on the Tantra- vārttika called Nyayaparayana (vide शाल्मलीग्रामसम्भूतभट्ट सोमेश्वरात्मजः । गङ्गाधरोऽतिगम्भीरं व्यवृणोत् तन्त्रवार्तिकम् ). He was a follower of the Bhatta School. He is placed between 1230 and 1300 A. D. 
During the fourteenth and the fifteenth centuries the study of Pūrva-Mimāṁsa appears to have been very popular both in the 
43 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMÄNJALI 
South and in Mithila, the two main centres of Mimams, Several writers flourished and contributed to the thought. Vedanta Deshika, Madhavācārya, Bhaṭṭa Visņu, Ravideva, Parameshwara, and many others flourished in the South. In Mithila, on the other hand, it seems that the study of Purva-MImamsă reached its zenith. We have not been able to write out a complete history of Mithila but we know from several sources recorded here and there that during the reign of Rani Vishwasa Devi, wife of Raja Padmasimha, younger brother of Raja Shiva Simha, the patron of Vidyapati Thakkura of the 15th century, there was a big gathering of Panditas in the Catushcarana-yajña of a tank where about fourteen hundred MI- māṁnsakas alone were invited, a list of whose names has been recently unearthed from the private collection of a Pandita in Mithila. 
VEDANTA DESHIKA 
He was a great scholar of the Vishistadvaita school. He was born in a village near Conjeevaram about 1269 A. D. His works on Mimamsa are: i) the Mimämsä-Paduka, which is written in verse and extends up to the end of the Tarkapada, and ii) the Sesh- wara-mimāṁsā the name which he gave to his prose commentary beyond the Tarkapāda. The Mimāṁsāpādukā and a portion of the latter have been published from Conjeevaram. His position through- out seems to be somewhat influenced by his Vedantic thought. 
MADHAVACARYA 
Perhaps the most important figure of this period was Madhavā- cārya. He occupies a unique place in the history of the revival of Vedic Culture in the Medieval Period. He is said to have lived for about 90 years, from 1297 to 1886. His patron was Bukka Raya of Vijayanagram. His contribution to Mīmamsa is the famous Nyāya- mala in verse along with the Vistara in prose. We get in this work the gist of all the adhikaranas in very easy and lucid language. The treatment is so good that in later centuries this book alone came to be recognised as a suitable standard book for the beginners. The author gives the views of both the schools of Mimamsa. There have been several editions of this from Bombay, Poong and Calcutta, 
ེ་ 
DEVANATHA THAKKURA 
BHATTA VISNU 
49. 
Bhatta Visnu was a Mimamisaka of the Prabhakara School. The only work of his on Mimarisā known to us is the Nayatattva- sangraha, a commentary on the Tarkapada section only. It is not yet published. He is placed towards the close of the 14th century. 
INDRAPATI THAKKURA 
Indrapati was a native of Mithila. He was the son of Rucipati Upadhyaya, the famous commentator of the Anargharaghava of Murari Mishra I. Indrapati wrote only one work on Mimāṁsā, named Mimämsäpalvala. He was the pupil of Gopala Bhaṭṭa. Rucipati was a protégé of Raja Bhairavasimhadeva who ruled over Mithila about 1450 A.D. So Indrapati can easily be placed in the second half of the 15th century. 
• 
GOVINDA THAKKURA 
Govinda Thakkura is the celebrated author of the Kavyapra- dipa. He flourished in Mithila in the family of Budhawāḍas, in a village named Bhadaura. Keshava Thakkura was his father and Sono Devi was his mother. He was born about 1478 A.D. On Mīmāmsa he wrote a work called Adhikaraṇamālā (vide Agufiut बुधानां भूषणार्थे सुरत्नकठिनानाम् । मालामधिकरणानां गोविन्दोऽतियत्नतस्तनुते ). 
DEVANATHA THAKKURA 
Devanatha Thakkura was the son of Govinda Thakkura, the celebrated author of the Kāvyapradipa and the Adhikaraṇamālā. He had seven more brothers who were all great scholars. He was living in La. Sam. 443 1562 A.D. when under his orders a manuscript of Pakṣadhara Mishra's Aloka was transcribed (vide ल० सं० ४४३ चैत्रवदि एकादश्यां चन्द्रे महामहाठक्कुर श्रीदेवनाथमहाशयानुशासनात् mày fafenu). His only work on Mimamsa is the Adhikarana kaumudi. Here the author has explained the meaning of those adhikaranas which are very useful for the correct interpretation of the Principles of the Dharmashastra (vide धर्मशास्त्रेऽधिकरणं विचारेधूप- कारकम् । विधषा देवनायेन निर्बन्धेन निबध्यते ). He was a native of Mithila, 
F. 7 
50 
MĪMĀṀSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
RAMAKRSNA BHATTA 
Ramakṛṣṇa Bhatta was the son of Madhava and Prabhavati. Madhava left his native place and came to Benares along with his wife. Ramakṛṣṇa was born at Benares. He became a great scholar of name and fame. He has given every detail of himself in the beginning of his commentary on the Shastradipika. His only work on Mīmāmsa is the Siddhantacandrika, a commentary on the Shāstradīpikā which he wrote at]Benares in 1543 A. D. His was the earliest commentary written on the Shastradipika. It is a very fine commentary but unfortunately, we have got it only up to the end of the Tarkapāda. 
RAGHUNATHA BHATTACARYA AND ANNAM BHATTA 
The only work of Raghunatha on Mimamsa is the Mimamsā- ratna which deals with Pramāna, Prameya and Vidhi. A manuscript of his Prameya section was found in the private library of Kavindracārya Saraswati of Benares, a contemporary of King Shah Jehan. So, he can be easily placed in the 16th century. He appears to be a Bengali Pandita. 
Annam Bhaṭṭa is wellknown for his small primer on Nyaya- Vaisheṣika, named Tarkasangraha and its Dīpikā. He was the son of Tirumala Acarya who was a great scholar of the Advaita system. On Mīmāmsā he wrote 1) Subodhini, a commentary on the Tantra- vārttikā, 2) Rāṇakaphakkikāvyākhyā, also known as the Rāṇakoj- jivini, a commentary on the Nyayasudha of Someshwara, and 3) Rāṇakabhāvanākārikā vivarana in 54 verses only. None of these Mīmāmsa works has been published. He was indeed a scholar of name and fame. That he lived at Benares is clear from the well- known line which has now passed into a proverb - 'काशीगमनमात्रेण नान्न- mera f-which means that a man does not become a great scholar like Annai Bhaṭṭa simply by going to Benares. 
VARADARAJA 
Varadaraja was a famous writer of the Prabhakara School. He was the son of Ranganatha, grandson of Devanatha and great- grandson of Prapatartihara. He lived on the bank of the river Shuka in the South. His guru was Sudarshana. His work on Mīmāmsā is a commentary, called Dipikā, also known as the 
APPAYYA DİKṢITA 
51 
Arthadipikā or Varadarōji, on Bhavanatha Mishra's Nayaviveka. It is based on the tradition of the Prabhakara School. It is very easy and lucid. The author was well versed in Jyautisha, Vaidyaka and Vyākarana (ride, गुरुणि गुरुमते ज्यौतिषे शास्त्रकेऽपि प्रथितविमलकीर्त्तिवैद्यके 
etc.). He refers to Candra and has been himself referred to by Somanatha Dikṣita of the 17th century. He is thus placed in the 16th century. 
It appears that he was criticised for his commentary called Dipika which led him to remark at the end of his work, like Bhavabhuti's utterance- fafe, etc.- 
waai àszi facufa gan: àfaeft à विजानन्ते प्रायः स्वमतिपरिणामावधि कियत् । न तानुद्दिश्येयं कृतिरपि तु मत्तुल्यमहिमा जनिष्यत्येकोऽपिऽस्वकृतगुरुसेवाहततमः ॥ 
APPAYYA DIKSITA 
There is hardly any important branch of Sanskrit Literature which was neglected by Appayya Dikṣita. There are very few scholars to whose credit we can ascribe the authorship of over hundred works. He was indeed a great genius. He was the son of Rangarajādhvarin and grandson of Acarya Dikṣita. 
His younger brother was Accana Dikṣita. He belonged to the Bhāradvāja-gotra. His father was a contemporary of Kṛṣṇarāja, king of Vijayanagar. 
His works on Mīmāsa are: 1) Vidhirasayana in verse with a commentary in prose, called Vivekasukhopayojant. This has been written according to the views of Kumarila (vide anfang सारिणा निर्मितं विधिरसायनं मया । पद्यरूपमनतिस्फुटाशयं तत्सुखावगतये विविच्यते ). It has been published in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares; 2) Upakramaparākrama: 3) Vādanakṣatrāvalī, which is also called Vadanakṣatramālā; 4) Mayukhāvalt, a commentary on the Shāstradipikā; 5) Citrapața; and 6) Dharmamimāṁsāparibhāṣā. 
It is said that after coming to Benares from his native place in the South when Appayya Dikşita showed his Vidhirasayana to Khandadeva Mishra, the great MImarisaka, then living, the latter praised his scholarship very much. Mm. Pandita Gopinatha Kavirajaji thinks that Bhattoji, the great grammarian, read Vedanta under Appayya,Dikṣita. Scholars have now placed him between52 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
1520 and 1593. Except the Vidhirasayana and the Vadanaksatra- mālā (published from Madras) all the rest of his works are unpublish- ed. Shankara Bhatta wrote a criticism on the Vidhirasayana, called Vidhirasayana-düşaṇa. 
References: 1) Life of Appayya Drkṣita-Introduction to the Yadavabhyudaya, Vol. II, Vanivilas Press, Madras; 2) Introduction to Pūrva-MImamsa by Ramaswami Shastri; 3) Catalogue of Mimamsa Mss. in the Benares Sanskrit College Library. 
VIJAYINDRA TIRTHA 
VijayIndra Tirtha was a contemporary of Appayya Dıkṣita. His works on MImamsa are: 1) Nyāyādhvadipikā, 2) Mīmāṁsānaya- kaumudi, and 3) Upasaṁhāravijaya. The first two are the commen- taries on the Jaiminiya-sutras. He was the pupil of Surendra Tirtha. He is a very simple writer. None of his works is published. 
VENKATESHWARA DİKṢITA 
Venkateshwara Dikşita was the son of Govinda Dikṣita and Nagamamba and the teacher of Rajacuḍāmaņi Dikṣita. The only work of his on the system is the Varttikābharaṇa, a running commentary on the Tuptika. This is said to be a very lucid and elaborate commentary. He was a contemporary of Appayya Drkṣita. He was called 'सर्वतन्त्र स्वतन्त्र', 'अद्वैताचार्य', etc. Rajacudamani tells us about him in his Tantrashikhamani - श्रस्ति गोविन्दयज्वेन्द्रनागमाम्बातपः- फलम् । श्रीवेङ्कटेश्वरमुखी सर्वतन्त्र स्वतन्त्रधीः ॥ ... व्यतानि 'शुल्वमीमांसा' तथा 'कर्मान्तवार्त्तिकम्' । टुष्टीकायाः कृता टीका 'वार्त्तिकाभरणाभिधा' etc. 
NARAYANA BHATTA I 
Nārāyaṇa was the son of Matṛdatta, a great Mimamsaka. He was the follower of the Bhatta School and wrote two works on Mimämsä: 1) Tantravärtlikanibandhana, a commentary on the Tantravärttika, and 2) the Mana-section of the work known as Manameyodaya, published from Adyar, Madras. The latter deals with the Pramāṇas according to Kumārila. With its simple and easy flow of style the book is very interesting. It is mainly written in verses which have been also explained in simple prose. He quotes from Brhattika of Kumarila a line (vide pe 126). He was a 
LAUGAKSI-BHASKARA AND BHATȚA KESHAVA 
53 
devotee of Lord Vişņu and had a long life. He is placed between 1587 and 1656. 
References: 1) Indian Historical Quarterly, IX, 1933, 2) Intro- duction to the Prakriyasarvasva by Nārāyaṇa, published in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, and 3)'Introduction to Purva-Mīmāṁsa 
by Ramaswami Shastri. 
LAUGAKSI-BHASKARA AND BHATTA KESHAVA 
Bhaskara of the Laugakṣi family flourished towards the end of the 16th century. There has been a difference of opinion regarding the priority and posteriority of Laugakṣi and Apadeva, the author of the Nyayaprakasha. Mm. Pandita Cinnaswami Shastri and Dr. A. B. Keith are of opinion that Laugakṣi lived later than Apadeva and utilised freely the latter's work for his Arthasangraha. But there are critics, like Pandita Ramaswāmī Shastri, Dr. F. Edgerton and others, who hold just the opposite view. In fact, there are several passages in the Nyayaprakasha which appear to have been copied verbatim from the Arthasangraha. So it appears that Āpadeva was much influenced by Laugakṣi's work. 
He was the son of Mudgala and grandson of Rudra (vide Indian Logic by Dr. Keith, p. 38). He was, perhaps, like so many other Bhaskaras, a native of Southern India. The only work of his on Mimamsa is the Arthasangraha. It is an elementary book which is so very useful for the beginners. Due to its easy and simple style the book has become so very popular amongst the Sanskritists. 
It has been commented upon by Rameshwara Shivayogi Bhikşu, pupil of Sadashivendra Saraswati who was the pupil of Gopalendra Saraswati. This commentary was written at Benares. This com- mentary along with the text has been published from Benares. Jivananda Vidyāsāgara also has written a commentary on it which too has been published from Calcutta. Another commentary on it is by Kṛṣṇanatha Nyāyapaficānana which also has been published from Calcutta. From Bombay and Benares also there have been other editions of this text. Dr. G. Thibaut had published his English Translation in 1882. 
Bhatta Keshava flourished in the family of Laugakṣi who wrote Mimāṁsārthaprakāsha which is a short summary of MI- mamsa. It has been published in the Grantha Pradarshani, N. S., Vizagapatam. He quotes the views of the Utkala-mīmāṁsakas (p. 14.). 
54 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMĀNJALI 
NARAYANA BHATTA II 
The Bhatta family of the South domiciled at Benares became very famous by producing a number of scholars well versed in MI- māmsā and Dharmashastra. Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa, son of Rameshwara Bhatta, was one of those celebrated Panditas of that family. His mother's name was Uma. Although he was one of the foremost scholars of Mrmāins as described by his son 'पदवाक्यप्रमाणपारावारधुरीण', - 'मीमांसाद्वैतसाम्राज्यधुरन्धर', yet we do not know of his any other work except a commentary on the 8th Chapter of the Shastradīpikā. He was born in 1513 A. D., and a manuscript copy of his commentary on the Vattaratnākura is dated 1546, and hence, he can easily be placed in the first half of the 16th century. He was a devotee of Raghupati. A very interesting and important incident of his life was that he was responsible for the re-consecration of the idol of Shri Vishwanatha at Kashi after it was demolished by the Muslims ( ride काश्य पातकिविद्रुतं भगवतो विश्वेश्वरस्याचलम् । लिङ्गं भाग्यवशात् सुखाय soat ezengenerar a: 11) 
SHANKARA BHATTA I 
Shankara Bhaṭṭa I was the son of Nārāyaṇa Bhatta, grandson of Rameshwara Bhatta and great-grandson of Govinda Bhatta, domiciled at Benares (ride P. V. Kane's History of the Dharma- shastra, Vol. I). He was the author of several works on MImāmsā : 1) Prakasha, a commentary on the Shastradīpikā. 2) Mimāṁsā-Bāla- prakasha. It deals with all the topics of MImamsa in brief. It has been published in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series. 3) Mimaṁsā- sarasangraha which is complete in 250 verses. The author says at the end of this work that the Acarya has described this Shastra in one thousand adhikaranas which Bhaṭṭa Shankara has described in one thousand Padas in this work (vide— आचार्यैरधिकरणान्युक्तानि सहस्रसंख्यानि । तत् सिद्धान्तान् पादैस्तत्संख्यैर्भट्ट शङ्करोऽबनात् II). It should be expressed that there is a belief that Jaimini wrote his Sutra-work and divided it into one thousand adhikaranas But the said number of the adhikaranas is not found in the Sutra-work. Somehow this number is completed with the help of later works which is clear from this book. This has been published from Benares in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series. 4) Vidhirasayanadūṣaṇa. It was written in refutation of the views of Appayya Diksita as given in the 
Vidhirasayana. 
NARAYANA PANDITA 
55 
The first and the last works are not yet published. 
He lived in the second half of the 16th century. 
NILAKANTHA BHATTA OR DIKṢITA 
Nilakantha Bhaṭṭa was the son of Shankara Bhaṭṭa I, grandson of Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa and great-grandson of Rameshwara Bhaṭṭa. He is well known for his twelve Mayukhas which are regarded as authoritative texts on Dharmashastra in the South. In fact, he is the founder of the Mayukha School in the South. This very fact makes it clear that he must have been a great Mimaṁsaka also. On Mimamsa, however, we have got only one work of his, called Bhāṭṭārka or Mimāṁsānyāyasañgraha. A manuscript of this work is in Dr. Jha's Library also. He may be placed in the begin- ning of the 17th century. 
SHANKARA BHATTA II 
Shankara Bhaṭṭa II was the son of Nilakantha Bhaṭṭa and grandson of Shankara Bhaṭṭa I. The only contribution by him to this system is the Bhāṭṭabhāskara, a commentary on the Jaiminiya- sutras. This work is also unpublished. He is placed in the begin- ning of the 17th century. 
DINAKARA BHATTA 
Dinakara Bhaṭṭa was the son of Rāmakṛṣṇa Bhatta, the elder brother of Shankara Bhaṭṭa I. Dinakara's younger brother was Kamalakara Bhatta, the celebrated author of the Nirnayasindhu. He is the author of a commentary, called Bhatta-Dinakart, on the Shastradipika. He was a great Dharmashastri and almost all his works are named after him. He wrote a comprehensive work on Dharmashastra at the instance of Chatrapati Shivaji (1627-1680), which he named Shivadyumanidipikā, after his patron's name, which was left unfinished and which his son Gaga Bhatta completed. Hence, he can be placed in the first half of the 17th century. 
NARAYANA PAŅDITA 
Nārāyaṇa Pandita was the son of Vishwanatha Suri and pupil of Nilakantha Bhatta. He is the author of the Piştapashumimāṁsā 
56 
MĪMĀMSĀ-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
both in prose and poetry (vide प्रणमन् गुरुभट्टनीलकण्ठं बुधनारायणदैववित् सहस्रम् । वरजैमिनिशास्त्रपूर्वपक्षानपरानप्यनुवक्ति कारिकाभिः). He is also the author of the Meya section of the Manameyodaya, which he wrote under the patronage of king Manaveda of Calicut. In Meya section, however, we find that his teachers in Mimāsā were Subrahmanya and Rama. A manuscript of his work in the Library, Sanskrit College, Calcutta, is dated 1822 A. D. Is he also the author of the Bhāṭṭanayodyota which is a work on Mımāṁsā- topics? He is placed in the 17th century. 
KAMALAKARA ALIAS DADU BHATTA 
One of the greatest writers of the 17th century was Kamalākara Bhatta, the celebrated author of the Nirnayasindhu. He was the son of Ramakṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭa who was also a great Mimamsaka of the Bhaṭṭa School (rride यो भाट्टतन्त्रगहनार्णवकर्णधारः शास्त्रान्तरेषु निखिलेष्वपि मर्ममेता- Shūdrakamalākara). His pet name was Dadu Bhaṭṭa. He was a versatile scholar and wrote standard works on almost every branch of learning. He was a very bold writer. He wrote about 22 works, a list of which he himself gives at the end of his Shantiratna in the order in which they were written. That he was well versed in both the schools of Mīmamsa is clear from his own verse at the end of his commentary on the Kāvyaprakasha- 
तकें दुस्तर्कमेधः फणिपतिभणितिः पाणिनीये प्रपञ्चे न्याये प्रायः प्रगल्भप्रकटितपटिमा भाट्टशास्त्रप्रघट्टे । प्रायः प्राभाकरीये पथि प्रथितदुरूहान्तवेदान्तसिन्धुः भौते साहित्यकाव्ये प्रचुरतरगतिर्धर्मशास्त्रेषु यश्च ॥ 
His works on Mimamsa are: 1) Bhāvärtha, a commentary on the Tantravärttika where his chief object was to criticise Raṇaka whom he describes as a plagiarist; 2) Aloka, a commentary on the Shāstradīpikā; and 3) Shāstramālā, an independent commentary on the Sutras. His Nirnayasindhu was completed in 1668 Samvat=1612 A.D. So, he is placed in the first half of the 17th century. 
ANANTA BHAṬṬA 
Ananta Bhatta, son of Kamalakara Bhaṭṭa and grandson of Rāmakṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭa, was also a Mimamsaka. He wrote a commentary on the Sūtras named Nyayarahasya and a Vetti on the Shastramālā 
. 
VISHWESHWARA ALIAS GĀGĀ BHAṬṬA 
57 
of his father. This Vriti is called Jyotsna. This was shown to Nilakantha Drkṣita after it was complete. So Pandita Ramaswami Shastri, however, says that it is a brief commentary on the Sutras. He is placed in the 17th century as a junior contemporary of Nilakantha Dikṣita 
VISHWESHWARA ALIAS GAGA BHATTA 
Gaga Bhaṭṭa was the son of Dinakara Bhatta and grandson of Ramakṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭa. Gaga was the pet name given by his father (vide गागाभट्ट इति प्रथां दिनकरात् प्राप्तः पितुर्लालनात्). He was the leading Mimamsaka of his time. He was the protégé of the great Chatrapati Shivaji who had appointed him to officiate at his own coronation in 1674 and at whose request Gaga had to disturb his ascetic life (vide तस्यानुरोधादिह वादिवर्णाधिक्ये चतुर्थाश्रमभङ्गदोष:- Skt. Mss. Cat. Alwar State, No. 117). 
He wrote an independent treatise on Mimamsa-sutras and named it Bhāṭṭacintamani of which the Tarkapāda section only is published in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. This is one of the best books on the literature. It deals with the philosophical topics from Kumarila's standpoint and discusses the views of Nyaya and Vyakarana also. The topics discussed are: ज्ञानप्रामाण्य, प्रत्यक्ष, ईश्वरवाद, शक्तिवाद, सृष्टि-प्रलय, श्रनुमान, श्रर्थापत्ति, प्रभाव, शब्द, विधिमेदतत्प्रकार, धात्वर्थ, श्राख्यात, लकारार्थ, कारक, समास, and नञर्थ, etc. From the nature of the topics discussed one can understand the importance of the work and the great depth of learning of the author. He is very bold in all his assertions. He wrote this work for the beginners (शिशुप्रतिविबोधनार्थ, p. 88 ). 
He refers to several authors amongst whom the following may be mentioned here: Someshwara, Murari Mishra II, Udayanācārya, Gangesha, Shiromani (that is, Raghunatha), Pakṣadhara Mishra, Ratnakoshakara and Drdhitikara. He quotes the views of his father in several places. Some of the noteworthy points from this work are: 
1) There are thirty-one Alaukika-pramāņas-six Dharmapra- māņas, six Dharma-abhedaka, six Dharmangatābodhuka, six Krama- bodhaka, three atideshas, three Badhapramānas and one Thapramāna (p. 13). 
F. 8 
: 
58 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
2) There are seven categories according to him in Mimama- substance, qualities, action, universal, inherence, energy (shakti) and negation' (p. 22). 
3) In place of the relation of Inherence of the Nyāya-Vaisheṣika, he holds the relation of Difference in Identity (Bhedabheda) like Parthasarathi Mishra (p. 23). 
4) He does not believe in the Yogajadharmapratyasatti of the Naiyayikas (p. 29). 
5) Though mainly he agrees with the processes of Creation and Destruction as held by Nyaya and Vaisheşika, yet he denies the necessity of postulating the Divine Desire and Effort for setting the ultimate particles into action. He holds that Dharma and Adharma alone will be able to produce the vijätīya-action in those particles (p. 46). 
6) He does not believe in the Mahapralaya. 
The next work of his is the Vrtti, called Kusumāñjali a com- mentary on the Jaiminiya sūtras (vide इदं गुरुमतं नु मद्विहितसूत्रवृत्तौ मया, विचार्य कुसुमाञ्जलौ बहु च दूषितं भूषितम्, p. 88 ). 
The third work which is of a great historical importance is the Shivarkodaya which, according to his own statement, was written at the instance of Shiva (Shivāji), called Chatrapati of the Bhonsala family, son of Sahu (1627-1680). This work is in continuation of the Varttika (Shlokavärttika) in verse which the Aryavarya (Kumārila), to the sorrow of all learned men, did not live to finish (vide the verses at the end of the Ms. No. 363, Skt. Mss. Cat., Alwar State)- 
प्रारम्भि यत्न इह यः खलु कारिकामि- 
रद्धा प्रतिप्रविभषामविदूषणाय । 
दुःखं सतां तदसमाप्सिकृतं शिवेन 
छत्राधिपेन सुविचिन्त्य समापितः सः ॥ 
यत्तर्कपादे बहुनाप्रण 
Font: qui afficerefact: I गागाभिवेनायमपूरि शेष - 
स्तस्याशया छत्रपतेः शिवस्य ॥ 
He is placed towards the middle of the 17th century. 
APADEVA II 
Apadeva IIwas domiciled at Benares. He was the son of Anan- tadeva I, grandson of Apadeva I, and great-grandson of Ekanatha 
ANANTADEVA Í AND JÏVADEVA 
59 
who, according to Kashinatha, the author of the Dharmasindhu, is the same as the great Mahāraṣṭra saint Ekanatha, which equation Prof. F. Edgerton does not believe in. As his son Anantadeva II was a protégé of Baz Bahadur Candra (1645-1675), we may place Apadeva II, his father, in the beginning of the 17th century. 
His works on Mīmāmsa are: 1) the Mimāṁsä-Nyäyaprakāsha, popularly known as Apadevi. It is a very popular text-book for the beginners. It has been already said that there is enough influence of the Arthasangraha of Laugākṣibhaskara on this work. The beak is quite interesting and helpful for understanding the topics of Mīmāmsā. In the first benedictory and the last concluding verses the author bows down to Govinda, his updsyadeva, which name has been wrongly understood by Dr. Keith to be his teacher's namne (vide Karmamimamsa, p. 13). In fact, his teacher was his own father whom also he mentions in the second benedictory verse. He was the follower of the Bhatta school (vide क्वाहं मन्दमतिः क्वेयं प्रक्रिया 
• भट्टसम्मता । तस्माद्भक्तेर्विलासोऽयं गोविन्दगुरुपादयोः). 
There have been several editions of this work along with the commentaries. It has been commented upon by 1) Anantadeva II, author's son, which is called Bhättälankära. It has been published in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares, and also from Bombay; 2) by Kṛṣṇanatha Nyāyapañcānana, which has been published from Calcutta ; and 3) by Mm. Cinnaswami Shastri, which too has been published in the Kashi Sanskrit Series, Benares. All these commentaries have been written for the students, and as such, they are quite useful. Professor F. Edgerton, New Haven, America, has translated it into English with copious notes and Indices and has edited the text in Roman Script along with his translation etc. His is very useful edition for critical studies. 
Another work of Āpadeva II is the Adhikaranacandrikā, which summarises the adhikaranas of MImämsä (vide Dr. Mittra's Mss. Cat., Vol. III, 1911). 
ANANTADEVA I AND JIVADEVA 
Anantadeva I, father of Apadeva II, was undoubtedly a Mrmāṁ- saka which is clear from the fact that Apadeva II, according to the edition of Prof. Edgerton, refers to the views of his father in his Nydyaprakāsha (vide amantscore quigi, Paragraph 143, although other editions read only '' in its place). 
60 
MIMĀMSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
Anantadeva II is the son of Apadeva II. He wrote a com- mentary on his father's Nyayaprakasha, called Bhattalankara, and also an independent treatise named Phalasānkaryakhaṇḍana. His Bhattalankara has been criticised by Khandadeva Mishra Ananta- deva II is more known for his Smṛtikaustubha which he wrote at the instance of Baz Bahadur Candra who was his patron. In this Kaustubha he deals with the Principles of Mimansa as regards the doubtful points of Dharmashastra. As his patron lived between 1645-1675, Anantadeva II also can be placed in the middle of the 17th century. 
Jivadeva was the younger brother and pupil of Anantadeva II. The only work of his on Mīmāṁsā is the Bhāṭṭa-Bhāskara. Khanda- deva has also criticised this work. JIvadeva quotes from the Nirnayasindhu of Kamalakara. He may be placed in the middle of the 17th century. 
KONDADEVA 
Koṇḍadeva was the pupil of Anantadeva II and the son of Rangoji Bhaṭṭa. From a verse in the beginning of the Vaiyakaraṇa- bhūṣaṇa we learn that he was the nephew of Bhaṭṭoji Dikṣita, the great grammarian (vide i) meya-Tarkadɩpikā, . p. 51; ii) भट्टोजिदीक्षितमहं पितृव्यं नौमि सिद्धये - Bhugana). The only work of his on Mimamsa known to us is the Bhattamatupradipika. He is placed in the 17th century. 
KHANDADEVA MISHRA ALIAS SHRIDHARENDRA 
He 
Khandadeva is an illustrious writer on Pūrva-Mimainsā. was the son of Rudradeva. Paṇḍitarāja Jagannatha says in his Rasagangadhara that his father Peru Bhaṭṭa studied Mimaṁsā at Benares under Deva, who is the same as Khandadeva, as explained by Nagesha in his commentary (vide "देवादेवाध्यगीष्ट स्मरहरनगरे शासनं जैमिनीयम्” – 'देवादेव' - ' खण्डदेवादेवेत्यर्थः ' - Nagesha) Panditaraja had Shah Jehan and his son Dara Shikoh as his patrons. So Khandadeva must have lived in the middle of the 17th century. Khandadeva's pupil was Shambhu Bhatta, who wrote a commentary, called Prabhavalt, on his teacher's Bhattadipika, wherein he tells us that Shridharendra was Khaṇḍadeva's another name and that he lived in the Brahmanala muhalla of Benares and died at Benares in 
RAJACUDAMAŅI DIKSITA ALIAS YAJÑANĀRAYAṆA 
61 
'वर्षे नेत्रसिद्विजपतिगणिते (1722 Samrat = 1665 A. D. - काश्यां श्रीब्रह्मनाले निरुपमचरितः खण्डदेवाभिधानः । प्राप्तः श्रीब्रह्मभावं विबुधवरगुरुर्ब्रह्मचर्यो यतीन्द्रः . From all these it is clear that Khaṇḍadeva lived in the middle of the 17th century. Khandadeva has criticised the works of Apadeva II and his sons-Anantadeva II and Jivadeva. 
His works are: 1) Mīmīṁsākaustubha which has been published from Conjeevaram and Benares. This is perhaps the first work of the author. It extends up to the Balābalādhikaraṇa (III.iii.7) only. It is very elaborate and its style appears to have been influenced by Navya-Nyāya. 2) Bhāṭṭadipikā is the magnum opus of Khandadeva. It occupies the same place amongst the Sanskritists in the South which the Shastradīpikā does in the North. It is very popular amongst the Southerners. It is not so elaborate as the Kaustubha. It is brief. It has been published several times from Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta, in the Mysore Oriental Library Series, Nirṇayasagara Press, Bombay, and also from Madras. 
There are several commentaries on this work: i) Prabhāvali by Shambhu Bhaṭṭa, the pupil of Khandadeva and son of Balakṛṣṇa. This was finished in 1764 Samvat 1707 A. D. It has been published from the Nirnayasagara Press, Bombay; ii) Bhattakalpataru by Ramashubha Shastri, Madras; iii) Candrodaya by Bhaskara Raya; iv) Bhāṭṭacintāmani by Vañceshwara which has been published from Madras; v) a recent commentary by Rangacārya, called the Sūtravṛtti Sāravali, which is also published in the Mysore Oriental Library Series. 
His third work is the Bhāṭṭarahasya, which discusses the Shabdabodhaprakriya according to the MImamsakas. Its method of treatment somewhat resembles the treatment of the Vyutpattivāda of Gadadhara Bhaṭṭācārya. It has also been published several times. According to his pupil Shambhu Bhaṭṭa, Khandadeva did not comment upon the Tarkapada. 
RĀJACŪŅĀMAŅI DIKṢITA ALIAS YAJÑANĀRĀYAṆA 
Rajacuḍāmaṇi was the son of Ratnakheța Shrinivasa Dikṣita. His another name was Yajñanarayaņa. He lost his parents very early and so he was brought up by his brother Ardhanarishwara Dikşita. He was indeed a genius. In the Prologue of his Nāţikā Kamalinikalahamsa, it is said that he wrote it at the age of six only. He was the disciple of Venkateshwara Drkaita. At the62 
MIMÄNSÄ-KUSUMĀNJALI 
instance of his teacher he wrote a commentary on the Jaiminiya- sūtras and named it Tantrashikhamani, in Shaka 1559, that is, 1637 A. D. Another well-known work of his, on the system, is a commen- tary named Karpūravārttikā, on the Shastradṛpika. It is also believed that he wrote also a commentary on the Sankarṣakāṇḍa, named Sankarşınyayamuktārali (vide E. Hultzsch's Report, No. II, Madras Sanskrit Mss.). He is placed in the middle of the 17th 
century. 
VEŇKATĀDHVARIN 
Venkatadhvarin was the son of Raghunatha Drkṣita and Sitamba and a contemporary of Nilakantha Drkşita, the grandson of Accăna Dıkṣita, the younger brother of Appayya Drkṣita, the son of Rangarājādhvarin. His works on the system are; the Vidhitrayaparitrāṇa, dealing with the three kinds of injunctions (vidhi) and Mimāṁsāmakaranda. He is placed in the middle of the 17th century. 
GOPALA BHATTA II 
Gopala Bhaṭṭa was the son of Manganatha Bhaṭṭa and grandson of Krana Bhatta, who was also a MImamsaka. Gopala Bhatta's contribution to the system was the Mimāṁsāvidhibhūṣaṇa which he wrote in defence of the Varttika of Kumarila against the unfair criticisms of Appayya Dıkṣita in the latter's Vidhirasāyana. He lived in the 17th century. 
RAGHAVENDRA YATI AND RAMAKRṢNA DIKṣITA 
Raghavendra was the son of Timmana Bhaṭṭa and Gopammā, grandson of Kanakacala Bhaṭṭa and great-grandson of Krsna Bhatta. The only work of his on MImamsa is the Bhattasangraha, a com- mentary on the Jaiminiyasūtras. He flourished in the middle of the 17th century. 
Rāmakṛṣṇa Dikşita was the son of Dharmarajädhvarīndra, the celebrated author of the Vedāntaparibhüşü and grandson of Ven- katanatha. He has written Mimāṁsānyāyadaṛpaṇa on the Jaimi- niyasūtras. He is placed in the middle of the 17th century. 
SOMANATHA DIKṢITA 
Somanatha was the son of Sûra Bhaṭṭa and the younger brother of Venkatadri Yajvan of the Nittalakula-gotra He learnt all the 
VAIDYANATHA TATSAT 
63 
branches of learning (kalamakhilam) from his own elder brother. He called himself 'wenyearof' in the colophon of each of the chapters of his commentary. The only work of his is the commen- tary, called Mayūkhamālikā on the Shastradɣpika. It extends from the second Pada of the first chapter to the end of the 12th chapter. It is a standard and very popular commentary on the Shastradṣpikā. It has been published from the Nirṇayasagara Press, Bombay. It refers to Bhavanatha and Varadaraja and the Vidhirasayana of Appayya amongst several others. He has been himself referred to by Shambhu Bhatta in his Prabhavali. From these references we conclude that he must have lived somewhere in the middle of the 17th century. 
YAJNANARAYAṆA DIKṢITA 
Yajñanārāyaṇa was the son of Kondabhaṭṭāraka, also called Bhaṭṭopadhyaya, and Gangambika, grandson of Yajñesha and Sarvambika and great-grandson of Tirumala Yajvan. His elder brother also was named Tirumala Yajvan. He belonged to the Kashyapa-gotra and Ṛk-shakha. The only work of his is the com- mentary on the Shastradṛpikā called Prabhamandala. It does not exist on the Tarkapāda. From the extracts found in the Mss. Catalogue it appears to be a good commentary. He is also placed in the middle of the 17th century. 
GADADHARA BHATTACARYA 
Gadadhara Bhaṭṭācārya was a versatile scholar of Bengal. He was the son of Jivacārya and a younger contemporary of Jagadisha Bhaṭṭācārya. He was the student of Harirama Tarkavägisha of Navadwipa. He was a great Naiyayika and has written several standard works on Nyaya. His work on Mimams is the Vidhi- svarūpavicāra, which has been published from Baroda and Calcutta. He is placed in the middle of the 17th century. 
VAIDYANATHA TATSAT 
Vaidyanatha Tatsat was the son of Rama Bhaṭṭa, also known as Rāmacandra Suri of the Tatsat family, who was well versed in पद, वाक्य and प्रमाण. His works on Mimārsā are : 1) Prabhā, a com- mentary on the Shastradipika, and 2) Nyayahindu, which is an 
64 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMĀNJALI 
adhikaraṇa-wise short commentary on the Jaiminiya-sutras. The Nyāyabindu has been published from the Gujarati Press, Bombay, along with a very brief Tippant by the late Pandita Madanamohana Pathaka, sometime a Professor of the Sanskrit College, Benares. He was a follower of Kumarila Bhatta. As regards his date we find that he wrote a commentary called Udaharanacandrika on the Kāvyapradipa in 1740 Samvat [vide faudzyfaçunfùffàsa (1740) कार्त्तिके सिते । बुधाष्टम्यामिदं ग्रन्थं वैद्यनाथोऽभ्यपूरयत्], that is, 1683 A. D. which helps us to place him towards the end of the 17th century. 
1 
KAVIMANDANA SHAMBHU BHATTA 
He was the son of Balakṛṣṇa and the pupil of Khaṇḍadeva. He lived at Benares. His main work is his commentary on the Bhatta- dipika of his teacher, which he named Prabhavalt. It is one of the best commentaries. This was written at Benares in 1764 Samvat, that is, 1707 A. D. (vide वेदर्तुमुनिवसुभिर्गणिते वत्सरे शुभे । ज्येष्ठे कृष्णे रुद्रतिथावियं A far). It has been published from the Nirṇayasagara Press, Bombay. Another work of his is a metrical summary of Mimamsa, named Purvamīmāṁsādhikaraṇasankṣepa. In his commentary, he refers to Somanatha Dikṣita, the author of the Mayukhamālikā on the Shastradɩpika. He lived towards the end of the 17th century and the beginning of the 18th century. 
MURARI MISHRA III 
Murari Mishra III was the author of the Angattvanirukti, which has been now published in the Anandashrama Sanskrit Series, Poona. This treatise discusses the auxiliary nature of the various sacrifices. He says in the very beginning of his work that he is a follower of Kumarila. There are references to Tantraratna, Shās- tradipika, Vidhirasayana and Bhattadipika and also the Mimāmsa- kaustubha of Khandadeva in this treatise. There are several passages in it which closely follow the trend of Khandadeva's works. He should be distinguished from the author of the Tripādīnītina- yanam. He should be placed towards the end of the 17th or the begininning of the 18th century (vide Dr. Umesha Mishra's article in the Proceedings of the Oriental Conference, Lahore), 
VAIDYANATHA PẪYAGUṆŅA 
BHĀSKARA RAYA ALIAS BHĀSURĀNANDA DĪKSITA - 
65 
Bhaskara Raya was the second son of Gambhira Raya and Koṇambika. Nrsimha Yajvan of Benares was his guru. He was a versatile scholar and contributed to almost every branch of learn- ing. He was one of the greatest votaries of the Shrividyā, upon which also he wrote several works. His works on the Tantrashästra are regarded very authoritative. His commentary, called Setubandha, on the Nityaṣoḍashikārṇava Tantra, published in the Anandashrama Sanskrit Series, Poona, was written in Samvat 1789=1732 A. D. and his Saubhagya-Bhaskara, a commentary on the Lalitasahasranāma, was composed at Benares in 1785 Samvat, that is, 1728 A.D. From these two references it is obvious that Bhaskara Raya lived in the first quarter of the 18th century. 
His works on Mimämsä are: 1) Vadakutuhala, dealing with his controversy on the question of lakṣana in Matvartha in the words- 'Pashu, Soma,' etc., in the vidhirākya-Somena Yajeta', Pashunā Yajeta, etc.; 2) Candrikā, also called Bhāṭṭadipikā, by the author, is a commentary on the four chapters of the Sankarşakāṇḍa, published from Benares in the Pandit, New Series, Vols. XIV- XV; and 3) Caudrodaya, a commentary on the Bhattadipikā of Khandadeva. 
VASUDEVA DIKṣITA 
Vasudeva was the son of Mahadeva Vājapeyin and Annapūrṇā. He was the Adhvaryu-priest in the Sacrifices performed by Ananda Raya, the Minister of the Mahratha kings of Tanjore-Sarabhoji and Tukkoji Bhonsale about 1711 and 1735. So he may be placed in the first half of the 18th century. 
His only work on MImamsa is the Adhvara-Mīmāṁsā-Kutuhala- vṛtti, which has been partly edited by Mm. S. Kuppuswami Shastri from the Vaṇīvilāsa Press, Madras. It is an elaborate commentary on the Jaiminiya-sūtras. 
VAIDYANATHA PAYAGUNDA 
Vaidyanatha Bhatta, popularly known as Balambhaṭṭa, was the son of Mahadeva Bhatta and Veņi. He was the pupil of the famous grammarian-Nagesha Bhatta. He has written standard works on Vyakarana and Dharmashastra. His only work on Mimamsa is the Pistapashunirṇaya. His patroness was one Laksmi Devi of Mithila, though he himself lived at Benares. As his teacher, Nagesha, lived 
F. 9 
66 
MÏMĀṀSÃ—KUSUMĀÑJALI 
in 1714 A:D. when the latter was invited by Shri Savai Jayasimha Varman, ruler of Jaipur, we may place Vaidyanatha also in the middle of the 18th century. 
RAMANUJACARYA 
Ramanujacarya was a Mimäinsaka who wrote on both the schools of Mimänsä. He wrote the Tantrarahasya on the Prabhā- kara School which deals with the Mānas and the Meyas. It has been published in the Gaekwad's Sanskrit Series, Baroda. It is very simple and lucid in its style. He wrote on the Bhaṭṭa school a commentary, called Nayakaratna also called Nyāyaratna, on the Nyayaratnamälä of Parthasarathi Mishra. He lived on the banks of the Godavari; and as he refers to Khandadeva in his work, he may be placed in the 18th century. 
NARAYANA TIRTHA 
From the colophon of the first chapter of his Bhaṭṭuparibhāṣā ( इति नीलकण्ठसूरिसूनुगोविन्दविरचिते भाट्टभाषाप्रकाशे प्रथमोऽध्यायः - p. 13), it is clear that he was the son of Nilakaṇṭha Süri of Benares and that his name during the Grhasthashrama was Govinda Shastri. He was initiated into the Sannyāsāshrama by Shivarāma Tīrtha, and was named Narayana Tirtha. (vide भगवच्छिवरामतीर्थशिष्यो मुनिनारा- यणतीर्थनामधेयः । व्यतनोदधिकाश भाट्टभाषाग्रथनं भावनयप्रवेशहेतोः ॥ – End of the Bhāṭṭabhāṣāprakāsha, p. 61). He was a versatile scholar (vide श्रीनारायण तीर्थानां षट्शास्त्रीपारमीयुषाम् - colophon of the Laglucandrikā by Brahmananda) and wrote mainly on Vedanta. His only work on Mimämsä is the Bhāṭṭaparibhäşă which was composed at Benares and which has been published in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. It is a good summary of all the twelve chapters of Mimänsä. It is also clear from the text that the work was under- taken before he became a Sannyasin. Perhaps, Vasudeva Tirtha was his teacher in Vedanta. (wide वासुदेवतीर्थविद्यशिष्यश्रीनारायणतीर्थ- विरचिता सिद्धान्तबिन्दुलघुव्याख्या ). Narayana Tirtha has commented upon the Siddhantabindu of Madhusudana Sarasvati who must have lived after the middle of the 17th century, and so the former may be placed in the beginning of the 18th century. 
UTTAMASHLOKA TIRTHA 
BRAHMANANDA SARASWATI 
67 
He is more often called Gauda-Brahmananda. He was the pupil of Narayana Tirtha (vide―i) श्रीनारायणतीर्थानां गुरूणां चरणाम्बुजम् - colo- phon of his commentary on the Siddhantabindu; ii) arcivici गुरूणां चरणस्मृतिः - the beginning verse of his commentary on the Advaitasiddhi). His another teacher was Paramananda Saraswati (viile भजे श्रीपरमानन्द सरस्वत्यंघ्रिपङ्कजम्--colophon of both the Nyāyuralna- vali and Laghucandrikā). Like his teacher he was also a great San- nyasin living at Benares. He seems to have been a Bengali before entering into this Ashrama. He was a versatile scholar and wrote several standard works on Vedanta, of which the Laghucandrikā on the Advaitasiddhi and the Nyayaratnavali, on the Siddhantabindu of Madhusudana Saraswati are well known works. His only work on Mimamsa is the Mimamsacandrikā, a commentary on the Jaimi- nīyasutras. Like his teacher he also might have been a follower of the Bhaṭṭa school; and in fact,' has been the considered opinion of the Advaitins even including the great Shan- karācārya. He lived in the first quarter of the 18th century. 
RAGHAVANANDA SARASWATĪ 
Raghavananda, also known as Raghavendra Saraswati, was another great Sannyasin who also contributed to the system of Mimämsä. His works are: 1) Mimāṁsāsūtradidhili, also known as the Nyayalilavatt, which is a commentary on the Jaiminiyasutras ; and 2) the Mīmāṁsāstavaka. We do not know exactly when he lived. For the time being, I place him in the 18th century. 
BALAKRSNANANDA ALIAS BALAKRSNENDRA SARASWATĪ 
He was the pupil of Raghavendra Saraswati. He is distinct from the author of the Siddhhasiddhāñjana published in the Trivan- drum Sanskrit Series, for the latter's teacher was Vasudeva Yatindra. His work on MImamsa is the Nyāyāmoda (vide Mss. Cat. Tanjore Library). He is placed in the 18th century. 
UTTAMASHLOKA TIRTHA 
He is the celebrated author of a commentary, called Laglamyā- yasudha on the Laghuvarttika of Kumārila, which is perhaps the same as the Tuptikā. He lived at Benares (vide faya श्रितविश्वेशमूर्त्तिना । उत्तमश्लोक तीर्थेण तत्प्रीत्यै प्रथिता स्फुटम् ) placed in the 18th century. 
He may be 
68 
MĪMĀMSA-KUSUMĀÑJALI 
KRSNA YAJVAN 
Krṣṇa Yajvan was the celebrated author of the Mimāṁsāpari- bhāṣā, an elementary primer which gives in short the entire contents of Mimamsa. It is a well read book and has been published several times from several places. Bhagavaticarana Smṛtitirtha of Calcutta wrote very brief notes on the important points of the book. It has also been published from Calcutta. 
RAMESHWARA 
Rameshwara was the son of Subrahmanya. He lived at Benares and wrote a Vrtti, called Vihdāravāpt, on the Mrmārsāsūtras in 1763 Shaka, that is, 1841 A. D. He should be identified with the author of the Arthasangraha-Kaumudi, a commentary on the Artha- sangraha of Bhaskara. So, he was the pupil of Sadashivendra Saraswati and grand-pupil of Gopalendra Saraswati. The Vapī was written as an introduction to the work of Madhava Sarvajña (vide i) श्रीमाधवसर्वज्ञो मीमांसाब्धिं सरश्चकाराल्पम् । तत्राक्षमा विहारे वाप्यामस्यां विहृत्य दृढयत्नाः । पश्चात् सागरविहरणशीला लोके भवन्तु निःशङ्कम् । एवं जातमतिः काश्यां श्रीगुरोः कृपया मुदा । रामेश्वरः प्रयत्नेन वापीं रचितुमारभे - Beginning verses of the Vihāravāpī; ii) या काशी निखिलगुरोर्महेश्वरस्य प्राणान्ते सकलशिवप्रदा प्रसिद्धा । तत्राहं सकलसुरेशलब्धतत्त्वस्तत्रेयं सुजनहितप्रदा निबद्धा – Concluding 
- verse of his Kanumnudh). He lived in the middle of the 19th century. 
It appears that there lived at Benares a Pandita, named Shiti- kantha, who wrote a commentary (ortti), called Subodhint, on the Jaiminiya-sutras which was published in the Pandit. This author, later on, became a Daṇḍi-Sannyāşi and became popular as Ramesh- wara. The late Babu Govind Das of Benares says in a note that "he is the author of the अर्थसंग्रहटीका also. (He) was a Sammyāsī (दण्डी) and lived in the Matha just beyond my garden in which my tutor Pandit Hari Shastri Manekar spent the later portion of his life. Shitikaṇṭha was probably his fe name, while Rameshwara was his later name. Now, this Subodhini was written at Benares in 1761 Shāka, that is, 1839 A. D. (vide दमवद्रिक्ष्मामिते शालिवाहशाके- ऽविमुक्तके । सहस्यसितपक्षेऽथ द्वितीयायां रवौ निशि । रामेश्वरः सूत्रवृत्तिं निर्मायाथ यथामति । श्रनपूर्णाविश्वभर्तृचरणेऽर्पितवानिमाम् — Concluding verses). Again, the author says at the end of the 10th chapter that the book was com- plete in 1758 Shāka, that is, 1836 A.D. (vide नन्दबाणाद्रिभूशाके शुच्यां भूते सिते रवौ । रचितो ग्रन्थसन्दर्भों विश्वेशचरणेऽर्पितः ). So, he says at the end of 
। 
" 
MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA GANGANATHA JHA 
69 
the 11th chapter also. From the dates and their place of residence, it appears that the author of the Vihararāpi is the same as the author of the Subodhint. This Vṛtti is indeed very good and quite easy. He had studied the Shastra under his father (wide π a पितृत्वं च यत्रैकत्र स्थितं मम - concluding verse). 
Coming to the twentieth century we find that there have been several scholars who have devoted their energy and time to the study of Purva-Mimamsa. Although there is very little encourage- ment for the study of our Shastras these days, yet for the sake of learn- ing only even such branches of our Shastra, as the Purva-Mīmāmsā, are being studied unhampered. It will not be out of place to mention that it was due to the fresh impetus given to its study by the late Mahāmahopadhyaya Dr. Sir Ganganatha Jha in the North and Mm. Pandita S. Kuppuswami Shastri in the South that the study of Mīmāmsā is still found in flourishing condition. There are several good Mimamsakas living, but they have not written, so far as it is known to me, any work on it and so I will confine myself to only such Panditas who have written something on the system. 
MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA GANGĀNĀTHA JHĀ 
Pandita Ganganatha Jha was born on September 25, 1871, in a village, called Gandhavāri in the District of Darbhanga, in Mithila. He was the third son of Pandita Tirthanatha Jha and Ramakashi Devi. He was a versatile scholar and had studied almost all the branches of the Shastra under the expert guidance of his teachers, amongst whom the names of Mahamahopadhyāyas Jayadeva Mishra, Citradhara Mishra (vide श्रीचित्रधरमिश्रस्य मीमांसापारदृश्वनः । सर्वतन्त्रस्वतन्त्रस्य जयदेवस्य मद्गुरोः – Beginning verses of his Mimamsa-Maṇḍana), Shivakumāra Mishra and Gangadhara Shastri deserve mention. came to Benares, and studied there for several years. He studied the Shastra both on the orthodox and the Modern critical lines. 
He 
He was the head of several Institutions. He was a Professor of Sanskrit in the old Muir Central College, Allahabad, then the Principal of the Government Sanskrit College, Benares, and then the Vice-Chancellor of the Reorganised Allahabad University for over nine years. Though engaged in all these multifarious duties he was able to write more than fifty works on different subjects and in different languages. He was indeed a versatile scholar. 
70 
MĪMĀMSĀ—KUSUMĀÑJALI 
He was 
Regarding his contribution to Mimamsa we may say without any hesitation that he occupied the same position in the country which the great Kumarila had occupied in his own days. Paṇḍita Gangānātha Jha not only translated the two main Vārttikas of Kumārila and the Bhasya of Shabara into English but, in fact, he was responsible for the revival of its study in Northern India. He himself studied it under the late Mm. Pandita Citradhara Mishra, a great Mimāṁsaka of the time (wide... गुरोस्तथा । श्रीचित्रधरमिश्रस्य मीमांसापारहश्वनः) and encouraged its study wherever he went in several ways. the first scholar to write a thesis on the Prabhakara School of Purva- Mīmāmsā, for which the University of Allahabad conferred upon him its highest degree-the Doctor of Letters-in 1909. This was summarised by him into Sanskrit. Then he has translated the Shlokavärttika and the Tantravārttika of Kumarila for the Biblio- theca Indica Series and the Bhasya of Shabara for the Gaekwad's Sanskrit Series into English and has written a very comprehensive work named Purra-Mimämsä in Its Sources to which this writer has the honour to add this critical Bibliography as an Appendix. In Sanskrit he has written a very easy and lucid commentary called Mimāṁsāmandana on the Mimāṁsānukramanikā of Mandana Mishra. Besides, he has edited several works on Mimaisa. He lived at Allahabad for over forty years and, to the sorrow of all, left his physical body on the 9th of November, 1941, on the banks of the Triveni at Prayaga like the great Kumārila Bhatta. 
PANDITA SUDARSHANĀCĀRYA 
Sudarshanācārya belonged to the Punjab (पञ्चनदीयश्रीसुदर्शनाचार्य etc.-vide the colophon of his Prakasha). He was a follower of the Ramanuja School. He lived at Allahabad and studied under the late Mm. Gangadhara Shastri, C.I.E., Professor of the Sanskrit College, Benares. He wrote on Nyaya and Vedanta also. His work on Mimamsa is the Prakasha, a commentary on the Tarkapāda of the Shastradɩpikā which he wrote at Benares in 1964 Samvat, that is, 1907 A. D. Shrinivasacārya Deshika was his Dikga-guru (vide the concluding verses of his Prakasha). This has been published from the Vidyavilas Press, Benares. 
KRSNANATHA NYAYAPANCANANA 
Kṛṣṇanatha was the son of Keshava and Kamala. He lived in a village, named Purvasthalt, on the bank of the Bhagirathi, near 
MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA S. KUPPUSWAMI SHÄSTRI 
71 
Navadvipa. He was a very good scholar and wrote easy com- mentaries on several important and useful works. On Mimaṁsă, he wrote commentary on the Arthasangraha and also on the Nyāyaprakasha of Apadeva, called the Arthadarshani. His com- mentaries are very useful for the beginners. Both of these have been published from Calcutta. His commentary on the Nydyapra- kasha was completed in 1821 Shaka, that is, 1899 A.D (vide चन्द्रद्विवसुभूमाब्दे शाके रविदिने निशि । ऊर्ध्वशुक्ल तृतीयायां टीकेयं पूर्णतां गता - concluding verse of his Arthadarshanī). 
MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA A. CINNASWAMI SHĀSTRĪ 
He is a 
Pandita Cinnaswami Shastri comes from the South and is a teacher in the Oriental College, Benares Hindu University. specialist in Mrmanisa in the University. He is one of the students of Mm. Kuppuswami Shastri of Madras. He has written a com- mentary on the Nyayaprakasha, called Saravivecani, which has been published in the Kashi Sanskrit Series. It is quite good for the beginners. He has also edited the Tarkapada of the Brhalt along with the juvimata for the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares. 
VAMANA SHASTRI KINJAWADEKARA 
Pandita Vämana Shastri was a very enthusiastic worker in the field of Purva-MImänsä. He lived at Poona and had founded an Institution for the publication of Mimamsa works. He had begun to publish an old commentary on the Prakaraṇapañcikā, but unfortunately, he died soon. His Pashvalambhana-mimämsä is the only work on Mimäinsa which has been published in the Ananda- shrama Sanskrit Series. 
MANAMAHOPADHYAYA S. KUPPUSWAMI SHASTRI 
Pandita Kuppuswami Shastri is a nucleus for the study of Pürva-MImamsa in the South. He has taught and produced several scholars in MImamsa. Mahamahopadhyāyas Anantakṛṣṇa Shastri of Calcutta, Cinnaswami Shastri of Benares University, Dr. T. R. Cintamani of Madras are some of his well-known students. He has written several papers on the system, mostly on the Prabhakara 
•# 
72 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMĀNJALI 
School (vide Proceedings of the Oriental Conferences at Calcutta and Allahabad). Besides, his big Introduction to his edition of the Brahmasidhi by Mandana Mishra throws much light on his views about certain historical aspects of Mimamsa. He was for many years. a Professor of Sanskrit at the Presidency College, Madras, and is now a retired I. E. S. He has worked in several capacities in several Institutions too. 
MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA PANDITA GOPINATHA KAVIRAJA 
He is indeed the greatest scholar of Indian Philosophy in all its aspects. He is perhaps the only scholar who has gone into the depth of Philosophical problems of India and has got his own experience in the subject. In him alone, we have got the most desired combination of the East and the West. Although he is so great a scholar, yet he has not been able to write much on Indian thought. But whatever he has written is enough to show his great learning and complete mastery over the subject. His contributions to Mimamsă are: 1) Introduction to Dr. Jha's English translation of the Tantravārttika, and 2) Short descriptive catalogue of the Mimainsa Manuscripts preserved in the Government Sanskrit College Library, Benares. He is a retired Principal of the Benares Sanskrit College. 
MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA P. V. KANE 
It is needless to say how intimately the rules of Hindu Law are connected with the principles of the Purva-Mimaisā. Almost all who have written on Dharmashästra must have been a good Mimārisaka also This is true of the orthodox Panditas also. Mr. Kane is one of those scholars who being a great Dharmashāstrī is also a good Mimamsaka. His three volumes of the History of the Dharmashastra give us enough proof as to the depth of his knowledge of the princi- ples of Purva-MImamsa. Besides, his small, though very interesting, booklet on Mimaisa is quite good for the beginners. It gives us, in brief, the gist of the contents of Purva-Mimansa. He is a prac- tising advocate of Bombay. 
PANDITA PASHUPATINATHA SHASTRI 
Pandita Pashupatinatha Bhaṭṭācārya was a Bengali scholar. He was a lecturer on Mimansa at the University of Calcutta Unfortunately, he died before he could produce more work on the 
COL. G. A, JACOB 
73 
subject. The only work of his on Mimamsa is his Introduction to the Purva-Mimämsä, which he published in 1923. It is a quite interesting book. In brief he discusses therein certain main topics of Mimamsă very clearly. He refutes some of the views held by Pandita S. Kuppuswami Shastri regarding the priority of Kumarila to Prabhakara. The book is good for the beginners. 
DR. T. R. CINTAMANI 
He is one Swami Shastri. He is the Senior Lecturer of Sanskrit at the University of Madras. He has written a thesis on the History of MImamsa for which he was awarded the dergree of 'Doctor of Philosophy' by the University of Madras. The thesis is not yet published though a certain portion of it has appeared in the Oriental Research Journal from Madras. He has also written several papers 
on different authors of Mimamsa, which have appeared from time to time in the Oriental Research Journal, Madras. 
of the favourite students of Pandita Kuppu- 
DR. A. B. KEITH 
Dr. Keith is a versatile scholar of the West. He has written almost on every school of thought. It is not proper for us to expect much original contribution from Dr. Keith. But from whatever he has done for Indian Philosophy and Literature we can know of his keen interest and devoted scholarship. He is a Professor of Sans- krit in the University of Edinburgh. His contribution to MImāṁsā is a volume on Karma-Mɩmāṁsä which was published in the Heritage of India Series in 1921. In about 107 pages he has tried to give us an idea of the contents of Mimäṁsā. 
COL. G. A. JACOB 
Col. Jacob, an officer in the army, was one of those Englishmen who had real love for Indian thought and have contributed to it even though engaged in non-scholarly field. He made a very good Index to Shabara's Bhasya, which has been published in the Saraswati- bhavana Studies, Benares (Vols. 2-6). It is a laboured work. The author has traced several references to other older authorities and given explanations of several terms in easy language. His Lauki- kanyayanjali is a proof of his varied interest and width of scholar- ship. He died after 1911. 
F. 10 
RO 
74 
MIMAMSA-KUSUMANJALI 
Of the scholars who have written History of Indian Philosophy, which includes a chapter on Mīmāmsă, we may mention the names of Dr. Sir S. Radhakrishnan, Vice-Chancellor of the Benares Hindu University, Dr. S. N. Das Gupta, the Ex-Principal of the Calcutta Sanskrit College, and Professor Hiriyanna of Mysore. Their treatment, particularly that of Sir S. Radhakrishnan, is lucid and interesting. For the English knowing public the treatment of Sir S. Radhakrishnan is much more useful. 
Besides these, several essays and articles dealing with the prin- ciples of Pūrva-MImamsa have been written though in different context from time to time. Some are mentioned here for reference- Colebrooke's Essay on the Mimämsä, Hindu Law by Dr. J. N. Bhattacharya, Hindu Law by Mr. V. N. Mandalika, and Mīmāṁṣā Rules of Interpretation by Mr. Kishorilal Sarkar. 
AL 
ASIATIO 
COSTY OF 
INDEX 
to 
Authors and Works in the Critical Bibliography 
A. Authors. 
A. B. Keith, 10, 14-15, 29, 53, 59. 
Accana Drkṣita, 62. 
Aitishāyana, 8. 
Alekhana, 10-11. 
Amaru, 17. 
Ananta Bhatta, 56. 
Anantakṛṣṇa Shastri, 71. 
Anantådeva I, 58-59. Anantadeva II, 59-61. Anantanarayana Mishra, 45. Annam Bhatta, 28, 50. Anubhavananda Yati, 41. Äpadeva I, 58. 
Apadeva II, 53, 58-61, 71. 
Appayya Dikṣita, 41, 51-54, 62-63. 
Āpastamba, 13. 
Apishali, 12. 
ArdhanarIshwara Dikṣita, 61. 
Ashwaghosa, 14. 
Ātreya, 9-10. 
Bādarāyaṇa, 5-6, 8, 13-14. 
Badari, 7-8. 
Balakṛṣṇananda, 67. 
Balakṛṣṇānanda Bhatta, 63-64. 
Ballantyne, 15. 
Bhagavaticarana Smrtitirtha, 68. 
Bhanga, 46. 
Bharadvāja, 10-11. 
Bhartṛhari, 17, 23, 33. 
Bhartṛmitra, 21, 43. 
Bhaskara Raya (Bhasurananda 
Drkşita), 61, 65. 
Bhaṭṭa Visņu, 48-49. 
Bhattoji Dīkṣita, 51, 60. 
J 
Bhavabhūti, 23, 33, 51. 
Bhavadasa, 16-17, 43. 
Bhavadeva Bhaṭṭa, 28, 44. 
Bhavanatha Mishra, 43, 47, 51, 63. Bhiksu, 43. 
Bhimācārya, 42. 
Bodhayana, 15-16. 
Brahmananda Saraswati, 67. 
Campakanatha, 42. 
Candeshwara Thakkura, 44. 
Candra, 43-44, 46, 51. 
Cidananda Pandita, 38, 47. Cinnaswami Shastri, 53, 59, 71. Citradhara Mishra, 69-70. Citsukhācārya, 33. 
Colebrooke, 74. 
Damodara Sūri, 44. 
Devanatha, 43. 
Devanatha Thakkura, 49. 
Devaswami, 14, 36. 
Dharmakirti, 22-23, 43. 
Dharmarajadhvarindra, 62. 
Dinakara Bhaṭṭa, 27, 41, 55, 57. 
Dinnaga, 33, 43. 
Ekanatha, 58-59. 
F. Edgerton, 53, 59. 
Gadadhara Bhaṭṭacarya, 61, 63. 
G. A. Jacob, 73. 
Gambhira Raya, 65. 
Gangadhara Mishra, 28, 47. 
Gangadhara Shastri, 69-70. 
Ganganatha Jha, 15-17, 20, 23- 24, 26, 28-32, 36, 39, 45-46, 69-70. 
Gauda Brahmananda, 66. 
75 
76 
Gopala Bhaṭṭa I, 27. 
Gopala Bhaṭṭa II, 62. 
Gopalendra Saraswati, 53, 68 
INDEX 
Gopinatha Kaviraja, 14, 31, 34, 
38, 51, 72. 
Govinda Bhaṭṭa, 54. 
Govinda Shastri, 66. 
Govindopadhyaya, 44 
Govinda Thakkura, 49. 
G. Thibaut, 53. 
Gunarati, 44. 
Halayudha Bhatta, 37-38, 46-47. Haraprasada Shastri, 35. Haricanda, 17. 
Harirama Tarkavägisha, 63. Hiriyanna, 31, 74. Indrapati Thakkura, 49. Ishwara, 33. 
Jacobi, 13-14, 21. 
Khandadeva Mishra (Shridharen- 
dra), 51, 60-61, 64, 66. 
Kishorilal Sarkar, 74. 
Konda Bhaṭṭaraka, 63. Kondadeva Bhaṭṭa, 60. Kṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭa, 62. Kṛṣṇadeva, 28. 
Kṛṣṇanatha Nyaya-Pañcanana, 
53, 59, 70. 
Kṛṣṇa Yajvan, 68. 
Kumarila Bhatta, 6, 13, 16-17, 21-29, 31-33, 37-40, 43, 45-47, 51-52, 57-58, 62, 64, 70, 73. 
Laugākṣi Bhaskara, 53, 59, 68. Lavukāyana, 9. 
Madanamohana Pathaka, 64. Madhava (Sankhya-Nayaka), 33. Madhavacārya, 23, 38, 48. 
Jagadisha Bhaṭṭācārya, 63. 
Madhava Bhatta, 27, 45. 
Jagannatha, 60. 
Madhava Saraswati, 30. 
Jaimini, 5-15, 29. Jaya Mishra, 27. 
Jayadeva Mishra, 69. Jayanta Bhatta, 21. 
Jayarama Bhaṭṭācārya, 44. 
Jivacārya, 63. 
JIvananda Vidyasagara, 53. 
Madhava Sarvajña, 68. 
Madhavayogin, 44. 
Madhusudana Saraswati, 66. 
Mahadeva Vajapeyin, 65. 
Manganatha Bhāṭṭa, 62. 
Mandana Mishra, 27-28, 31-34, 
36, 38 40, 70, 72. 
- 
Manu, 17, 55 
Matṛdatta, 52. 
Kamalakara (Dadu) Bhatta, 27, Mohanalal Sandal, 15. 
Jrvadeva, 59-61. 
J. N. Bhaṭṭacarya, 74. 
42, 45, 55-56. 
Kamukayana, 9. 
Kārṣṇajini, 8-10.. 
Kashakṛtsṇa, 12. 
Katyayana, 17. 
Kautilya, 10. 
Kanakacala Bhaṭṭa, 62. 
Kavindracarya Saraswati, 50. 
Keshava Bhatta, 53. 
Mukula Bhaṭṭa, 21 
Murari Mishra I, 49. 
Murari Mishra II, 29, 44-45, 
57. 
Murari Mishra III, 64. 
Nagarjuna, 14. 
Nagesha, 60, 65. 
Nandana, 46. 
NandIshwara, 47, 
! 
INDEX 
77 
Nanyadeva, 35. 
Narayana Bhatța I, 27, 32, 42, 52. Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa II, 54. Narayana Pandita, 55. 
Narayana Tirtha, 66-67. 
Nilakantha Dikṣita, 55-56. 
Nilakantha Suri, 66. 
Ntga, 35. 
Nrsimha Yajvan, 65. 
Pakṣadhara Mishra, 49, 57. 
Panini, 12, 17. 
Paramananda Saraswati, 67. Parameshwara, 13, 36, 48. Paritosa Mishra, 28, 45. Parthasarathi Mishra, 13, 16-17, 
21, 24, 26-28, 36-38, 41, 43, 45, 66. 
Pashupatinatha Shastri, 29, 72. Patanjali, 12, 14. 
Peru Bhaṭṭa, 60. Pingala, 17. 
Prabhakara Mishra, 23, 28-31, 
33-34, 36-37, 40, 46, 73. 
Praṇatārtihara, 44. 
Ramakṛṣṇa Bhatta, 13, 27-28, 
36-37, 42, 50, 55-57. Ramakṛṣṇa Drkṣita, 62. 
Rameshwara Shivayogin Bhiksu, 
53, 68. Rangacarya, 61. 
Ranganatha, 43. 
Rangarajadhvarin, 62. 
Rangoji Bhatta, 60. 
Ratnakheta Shrinivasa Diksita, 61. 
Ratnakirti, 35. 
Ratnakoshakara, 57. 
Ravideva, 44, 48. 
Rudradeva, 60. 
Sadashivendra Saraswati, 53, 68. Satishacandra Vidyabhuṣaṇa, 36. Shabara Swami, 11, 13, 16-20, 
26, 29. Shalikanatha Mishra, 30, 34-35, 
37, 43, 46-47. 
Shambhu Bhaṭṭa, 60-61, 63-64. Shankara Bhaṭṭa I, 42, 5,2 54-55. Shankara Bhatta II, 55. 
Pratyagrupa Bhagavan, 33, 37-38, Shanku, 17. 
43. 
P V. Kane, 31, 45, 54, 72. Raghavendra Saraswatī, 67. Raghavendra Yati, 62. Raghunatha Bhaṭṭacārya, 50. Raghunatha Dikṣita, 62. Rajacuḍamani Bhatta (Drksṣita), 
41, 52, 61. 
Rama, 63. 
Rama Mishra Shastri, 42. 
Ramanujacarya, 16, 28, 39, 66. 
Ramarya, 44. 
Ramashubha Shastri, 61. 
Shankarācārya, 22-23, 31, 44. 
Shitikantha, 68. 
Shivakumara Mishra, 69. 
Shivarama Tirtha, 66. 
Shiromani (Raghunatha), 57. Shrikara, 43-44, 46. 
Somanatha Diksita, 41, 51, 62, 64. Someshwara Bhatta (Ranaka- 
Drkṣita), 27, 45, 47, 50, 56-57. Sucarita Mishra, 26-27, 36-37. Sudarshana, 44 
Sudarshanacarya, 42, 70. Surendra Tirtha, 52. S. N. Das-Gupta, 88, 74. 
Ramaswami Shastri, 31, 34, 39, Sureshwarācārya, 31. 
52-53, 57. 
Suryaviṣṇu Mishra, 45, 
78 
INDEX 
S. Kuppuswami Shastri, 16, 23, 
29, 31-32, 34, 65-69, 71, 73.· 
S. Radhakrishnan, 74. Taranatha, 23. 
Timmana Bhaṭṭa, 62. 
Tirumala Yajvan, 63. 
Trilocana, 35. 
T. R. Chintamani, 8-9, 31, 71, 73. 
Udayanacarya, 34, 57. 
Vishweshwara 
Bhaṭṭa (Gāgā 
Bhaṭṭa) 27, 55, 57. 
V. N. Mandalika, 74. 
Yajñanārāyaṇa Drkṣita, 41, 61, 63. Yajñātman, 37. 
Yajnesha, 63. 
Yamunacarya, 21. 
B. Works. 
Abhidhavṛttimatṛkā, 21 
Umbeka, 26-27, 32-33. 
Umesha Mishra, 43-45, 64. 
Adhikaraṇacandrika, 59. 
Upavarṣa, 14-16, 33. 
Adhikaraṇakaumudī, 49. 
Adhikaraṇamālā, 49. 
Adhvara-MImamsa-Kntühala- 
Utkala-Mimamsaka, 53. Uttamashloka Tīrtha, 28, 67. 
Vacaspati Mishra I, 6, 32, 34-36, 
43. 
Vaidyanatha Payagunda (Balam- 
bhaṭṭa), 65-66. 
Vaidyanatha Tatsat (Bhaṭṭa), 42, 
63. 
Vrtti, 65. 
Advaitasiddhi, 67. 
Ajită, 27, 45, 
Alankara, 44. 
Aloka, 42, 49, 56. 
Amṛtabindu, 44. 
Anargharaghava, 49. 
Vamana Shastri Kinjawadekar, Āpadevi, 60. 
71. 
Vañceshwara, 61. 
Varadaraja, 43, 50, 63. 
Varadaraja Mishra, 34. 
Varahamihira, 17. 
Vasudeva Dikşita, 65. 
Vardhamana Upadhyaya, 46. 
Vasudeva Tirtha, 66. 
Vasudeva Yatindra, 67. Vedanta Deshika, 37, 48. Venkatadhvarin, 62. Venkatadri Yajvan, 62. Venkatanatha, 62. 
Angatvanirukti, 64. 
Āpastamba-Dharma-Sūtra, 12-13. 
Apohasiddhi, 35. 
Arthadarshani, 71. 
Arthadipika, 50-51. 
Arthasangraha, 53, 59, 68, 71. 
Arthashastra, 10. 
Arthasangraha-Kaumudi, 68. 
Baudhayana-Shrautasūtra, 9. 
Baudhayana-Grhyasūtra, 9. 
Bhagavadrāmāyaṇa, 40. 
Bhagavata Purāṇa, 13. 
Venkateshwara Dikşita, 28, 52, 
Bhamati, 35. 
61. 
Bharadvaja-Shrautasutra, 10. 
VijayIndra Tirtha, 52. 
Vikrama, 17. 
15 
Vindhyavasin 24, 46, 
Vishakhila, 33. 
Bhaṭṭabhaṣaprakasha, 66. 
Bhaṭṭabhaskara, 55, 60. 
Bhaṭṭacandrika, 15. 
Bhaṭṭacintamani, 67, 61. 
Bhaṭṭadinakari, 55. 
INDEX 
79 
Kamalini-Kalahamsa, 61. 
Bhaṭṭadipika, 60-61, 64, 65. 
Bhaṭṭa-Kalpataru, 61. 
Bhaṭṭanayodyota, 56. 
Bhaṭṭa-Paribhaṣā, 66. 
Bhaṭṭarahasya, 61. 
Bhaṭṭalankara, 59-60. Bhaṭṭamatapradīpikā, 60. 
Bhattasangraha, 62. 
Bhaṭṭarka, 55. 
Karma-Mimämsä, 14, 59, 73. 
Karpūravartika, 41, 62. Kashika, 26-27, 36-37. 
Katyayana-Shrautasutra, 8-9. 
Kavyapradipa, 49, 64. 
Kusumañjalivṛtti, 58. 
Laghucandrika, 66-67. 
Kavyaprakasha, 56. 
Kṣaṇabhangasiddhi, 35. 
Kusumañjaliprakaraṇa, 34. 
Bhavanaviveka, 7, 32-34. 
Bhavartha, 27, 56. 
Laghu-Nyayasudha, 28, 67. 
Bodhani, 34. 
Laghu-Varttika, 28, 67. 
Brahmasiddhi, 23, 31-32, 72. 
Laghvi, 30, 34. 
Brahmasutra, 7, 9, 28, 35. 
Lalitasahasranama, 65. 
Brahmatattvasamıkṣā, 32. 
Laukika-Nyayanjali, 73. 
Bṛhadaraṇyakopaniṣadbhāṣya, 32. Madhyamaṭrkā, 24. 
Brhadviṣṇu Purāņa, 23. 
Bṛhatr, 21, 29-30, 34-35, 71. 
Bṛhaṭṭīkā, 24, 43, 52. 
Candrika, 65. 
Candrodaya, 61, 65. 
Caturvargacintamani, 9. 
Chandogyānuvāda, 15. 
Citrapata, 51. 
Citsukhr, 38. 
Mahabharata, 9-10. 
Mahabhaṣya, 12. 
Manameyodaya, 52, 56. 
Mayukha, 55. 
Mayukhavalı, 41, 51. 
Mayukhamālika, 41-42, 63-64. 
Mimamsa-Balaprakasha, 54. 
Mimamsabhaṣyaparishista, 35. 
Mimamsacandrika, 67. 
Dharma-Mimamsa-Paribhasa, 51. 
Dharmasindhu, 59. 
Dipashikha, 30, 34-35. 
Dīpika, 43, 50-51. 
Dvadashalakṣaṇī, 14. 
Ekadashadyadhikaraṇa, 43, 46. 
Essay on Mimamsa, 74. Gudharthavivaraṇa, 42. Hindu Law, 74. 
History of Indian Philosophy, 74. 
Index to Shabarabhāṣya, 73. Introduction to Purva-MImamsa, 
73. 
Jyotsna-Vṛtti, 56-57. 
Mimamsa-Kaustubha, 61, 64. 
Mimamsa-Makaranda, 62. 
Mimamsamaṇḍana, 32, 69-70. 
Mimamsanуaya-Kaumudi, 52. 
Mimaṁsānukramaņikā, 32, 70. 
MImamsanyāyadarpana, 62. 
Mimämsänуayaprakasha, 59-60. 
Mimamsǎnyayasangraha, 55. 
Mimamsa-Paduka, 48. 
Mimamsa-Paribhāṣa, 67. 
Mimamsa-Pallvala, 49. 
Mimamsaratna, 50. 
MImamsaratnaprakasha, 53. 
MImamsasara-Sangraha, 54. 
80 
INDEX 
Paribhasa, 46. 
Pashvalambhana-MImamsa, 71. 
Mimamsa-Shastra-Sarvasva, 37- 
38, 47. 
MImamsastavaka, 67. 
Mimāṁsasūtradīdhiti, 67. Mimamsa-Sutrartha-Sangraha, 13 
MImamsavidhi-bhūṣaṇa, 62. 
Mimamsa Rules and Interpreta- 
tion, 74. 
Mitakṣara, 27. 
Naiskarmyasiddhi, 14. 
Nayakaratna, 28, 37, 65. 
Nayatattva-Sangraha, 49. 
Nayaviveka, 43, 51. 
Nibandhana, 30. 
Nirnayasindhu, 55-56, 60. 
Nititattvavirbhava, 47. 
Nyayabindu-Tippaṇī, 64. 
Nityaṣoḍashikarṇava-Tantra, 65. 
Nyayabindu, 63-64. 
Nyayadhvadipika, 52. 
Nyayakaṇika, 32, 35-36. 
Nyayalılavatı, 67. Nyayamala, 48. 
Nyayamalavistara, 38, 48. 
Nyayamañjarī, 21. Nyayamoda, 67. 
Nyayaрārāyaṇa, 28, 47. 
Phalasankaryakhaṇḍana, 60. 
Pişṭapashumimāṁsă, 55. 
Piştapashunirnaya, 65. 
Prabha, 42, 63. 
Prabhakara School of Purva- 
Mimamsa, 70. Prabhakara-Vijaya, 47. 
Prabhamandala, 41-42, 63. Prabhavatı, 60-61, 63-64. Prakaraṇapañcikā, 34, 71. Prakasha, 42, 54, 70. 
Prapancahrdaya, 16, 36. Pūrvamimamsadhikaraṇasan- 
kşepa, 64. 
Purva-MImamsa in its Sources, 
70. 
Rajashastra, 10 
Rapaka, 27. 
Raṇakabhāvanākārīkāvivaraṇa, 
50. 
Raṇakojjivini, 28, 50. 
Raṇakaphakkikävyäkhyā, 50. 
Rasagangadhara 60. 
Ratnaprabha, 14. 
Nyayaprakasha, 63, 71. 
Nyayarahasya, 56. 
Nyayaratna, 28, 66. 
36, 38, 42, 44. 
65. 
Rjuvimala, 21, 30, 34-35, 76. Sankarşa-Kanda, 10, 20-21, 36, 62, 
Sankarşa-Nyayamuktāvalī, 62. 
Sarvadarshana-Kaumudi, 30. 
Sarvopakāriņi, 27, 45. 
Saubhagyabhaskara, 65. 
Nyayaratnakara, 13, 21, 26-27, Saravivecanı, 71. 
Nyayaratnamala, 28, 37-40, 42, 66. Sarvanavadyakāriṇī, 45. 
Nyayaratnavalı, 67. 
Nyayasiddhantamala, 44. 
Nyayasucinibandha, 35. 
Nyayasudha, 27, 45, 50. 
Pañcatantra, 13. 
Pañcika, 44, 46. 
Paniniyasutra, 12. 
Seshwara-Mimāṁsā, 48. 
Setubandha, 65. 
Shabarabhagya, 19, 24-26, 28-30, 
36, 39, 70. Shankadipika, 44. 
INDEX 
81 
Shankarabhasya on Brahmasutra, 
40. 
Shankaradigvijaya, 22-23, 31-33. Shantiratna, 56. 
Shastradīpika, 13, 36-39, 42, 47, 
50-51, 54-56, 61-64, 70. Shastramala, 56. 
Shivadyumanidṛpika, 55. 
Shivarkodaya, 27, 58. 
Shlokavärttika, 13, 16, 21-22, 24, 
26-27, 33, 36, 42, 58, 70. 
Shribhaṣya, 16, 28. 
Shudrakamalākara, 56. 
Siddhantabindu, 66-67. 
Siddhantacandrikā, 13, 37, 42, 50. 
Siddhasiddhanjana, 67. 
Siddhitraya, 21. 
Smrtikaustubha, 60. 
Sphoṭasiddhi, 32. 
Subodhinт, 28, 50, 68-69. 
Sudhadhara, 28. Sūtravṛttisäravalr; 61. Taittiriyopanisadbhasya, 32. Tantracuḍāmaņi, 28. Tantrarahasya, 39, 65. 
Tantraratna, 28, 39-40, 43, 64. 
Tantrasara, 45. 
Tantrashikhāmaņi, 52, 62. Tantraṭikantibandhana, 45. 
Tantravarttika, 15, 22, 24-28, 31, 
45, 47, 50, 52, 56, 70, 72. Tantravarttikanibandhana, 52. Tarkasangraha, 50. 
Tarkadipika, 60. 
Tatparyaṭika, 26, 33. 
Tattvabindu, 31, 34, 36. Tautatimatatilaka, 45. Tripadınitinayanam, 44, 46, 64. Tuptika, 24, 26-28, 39, 52, 67. Udaharaṇa Candrika, 64. Upakramaparākrama, 51. 
Upasamhāravijaya, 52. 
Vadakutuhala, 65. 
Vādanakṣatrāvalı, 51. 
Vadivinoda, 44. 
Vādanakṣatramālā, 51-52. 
Vaiyakaraṇabhūṣaṇa, 60 
Vakyapadiya, 23. 
Varttikabharaṇa, 28, 52. 
Vibhramaviveka, 32. 
Vedantaparibhāṣā, 62. 
ViharavaрI, 68-69. 
Vijaya, 45. 
Vidhirasayana, 51-52, 55, 62-64. 
Vidhirasayanadūṣaṇa, 52, 54. 
Vidhisvarupavicāra, 63. 
Vidhitrayaparitrāṇa, 62. 
Vidhiviveka, 31, 34-35, 39. 
Vidhivicara, 37. 
Vivarana, 30, 44, 46. 
Vivaraṇaprameyasangraha, 38. 
Viveka, 43-44, 46. 
VivekasukhopajIvan, 51. 
Vivekatattva, 44. 
Vṛttaratnakara, 54. 
Vrtti, 12, 16. 
Vyutpattivada, 61. 
Yadavabhyudaya, 52. 
Yuktisnehaprapurant, 42. 
F. 11.