The Samkarṣa Kāṇḍa--A genuine Supplement to the 
Pūrva-mimāmsā Śästra 
The Samkarṣa Kanda, or the Samkarṣaṇa Kāṇḍa (henceforth abbreviated as Sk.) as it is otherwise known, is traditionally recognised 
a Supplement to the Purva-mimāmsā Sāstra. It has all along remained a sealed book to modern scholars. Mr. M. L. Sandal, in the Introduction to his English translation of the Purva-mimāmsā Sūtras (S. B. II. Series, Vol. 1. pp. x-xii), says that Sk. is a spurious work. He observes: 
(In the Sk.) there are no adhikaranas and the Sūtras are meagre; it is an apocryphal portion of the Mimāṁsā, most probably palmed off by Khanda- deva as genuine............. It has a commentary called Bhaṭṭacandrikā, by Bhaskara, son of Gambhira. (i). 
All the writers of the Mimāmsā have characterized Jaimini's Mimāmsā as containing twelve chapters. (ii). 
Strange to say that the Sk. is not mentioned by Alberuni and Abul Fazal. The latter has given the contents of the twelve chapters of Jaimini's Mīmāmsā. For these reasons, I am of opinion that the Sk. is a spurious work. (iii). The Sk. never found popularity amongst the students of Mīmāmsā, and was, therefore, very properly consigned to oblivion. We do not find it mentioned in any ancient works prior to Rāmānuja in his Brahmasūtra-Bhāṣya or Madhu- sūdana Sarasvati in his Prasthanabheda. (iv). 
The style of the so-called Sūtras does not resemble that of Jaimini; it is so very curt and mutilated that one cannot make out anything without the help of Bhaskara's Bhāṭṭacandrikā. There are no adhikaraṇas which are the peculiar characteristics of Jaimini's Mimāṁsā. (v). 
The last sūtra in the fourth pada of the fourth chapter, which is the 16th chapter in the work, ends with the word (phrase) ':' which has been repeated twice) and imitated from the final endings in the Samkhyapravacana or the Vedantasūtras. (vi). 
It is a valuable work in Mimāṁsā literature and is more in the nature of the Kalpa Sutras. It does not criticize any general principle as is done 
* Evidently, Mr. Sandal is misinformed. See the citation from the Samkarṣa Kāṇḍa by Śamkara on Vedānta Sūtras III. 3. 43: agad-- 
The Samkarsa Kanda 
291 
by Jaimini in his Mimams. The well-known twelve principles have been discussed in the twelve chapters by Jaimini; but, in the (present) work under description, there is a simple description of the post-sacrificial (?) minor ceremonies which really form the subject of the Srauta part of the Kalpa Sūtru. In this view, which I take of the Sk., it cannot be considered a supplement of Jaimini's Mimāmsā. (vii). 
Mr. Sandal's observations contain, no doubt, certain truths, which, if scrutinised, would reveal that some of them are misleading. 
The term Sk. is generally understood to stand for a clear and comprehensive exposition of Vedic propositions which are found scattered in the various recensions of the Vedas' or those supposed to have been lost. Naturally, then, it has no samgati which relates fogether the adhyāyas, pādas and adhikaranas. It is because of this characteristic that the Sk. has come to be regarded as a supplement to the Dradasalakṣani completing the twelve chapters of the latter by considering the topics left undiscussed therein. It is also mis- cellaneous in that it is based on both upadesa and atideśa as are the antra and the prasanga of the 11th and 12th chapters. For this reason, we cannot have strict samgati among topics in this kanda. This feature is therefore no argument against its authenticity. There can be traced, however, some relation (sangati) between the various parts en this Kanda such as ākṣepa, aparāda or prasanga. According to the printed commentary of Bhaskararaya, most of the padas of these four Chapters are known by different names indicative of the particular 
Cf. सम्यक् निःशेषतया स्फुटतया च कृष्ट्रा श्राकृष्य विप्रकीर्णवेदवाक्येभ्यः सङ्ग ह्य Thuttura gfa dmisyeqfa: 11 
2 Bhaskararaya begins his commentary, Bhaṭṭacandrika, thus: - श्रध्यायः प्रकृति विकृतिभेदेन कतिपयान्नवायान् संशोध्य, तैरेव न्यायैरितस्ततो विप्रकीर्णान्येद- वाक्यार्थानं पर्येण सम्यक निष्कृष्य नितुमेषा चतुरध्याय्यारभ्यते । अतएव संकर्षे न प्रत्यधिकरणं 
|| Appayya Dikṣita, in his Kalpataru Parimala (Nirnaya Sagar An., p. 50) observes: धर्मविचारार्थ द्वादशलक्षणीं कृत्वा तत्रासूत्रितान् कश्चिन्नधाया- साक्ष्य, तत्संग्रहार्थ द्वादशलक्षणीशेषं संकर्षकाण्डं कृतवतो महर्षिवरस्य जैमिनेः .... | Elsewhere the same work, he characterises the Sk. thus: aquafèenftaenenfaqa- द्वादशलक्षण्यविचारितनानाविषय- यायविचारात्मकः तत्परिशिष्टः तन्त्रप्रसंगवदुपदेश तिदेशसाधारण्येन प्रकीर्णकः प्रवर्तितः ॥ op. cit., p. 838). 
292 
The Samkarsa Kanda 
themes discussed in them-as can be readily seen from the following 
tabulation:- 
Adhyaya 
xiii 
xiv 
Pada 
Subject 
4 
यूपपादः 
39 
XV 
2 
3 
4 
2 
37 
3 
xvi 
33 
4 
1 2 
3 
इष्टकापादः 
अवदानपादः 
प्रेष 
होम 
कालपादः 
अभि 
ग्रह 
39 
93 
29 
99 
श्रार्षेयपादः वा वरणपादः 
stassarà azifaqız: निगदपादः 
वषट्कारपादः 
II 
If this feature of the work had been properly understood, Mr. Sandal would not have remarked that in the Sk. there are no adhikaranas and that the Sutras are meagre etc. Mr. Sandal complains that the Sūtras are "meagre." He is evidently under the impression that the Sutras printed in bold type in the edition of the Bhatṭacandrikā represent the complete Sutras constituting both the purrapakṣa and the siddhanta views in any given adhikarana. But, the pity of it is that these are not at all complete Sutras but only the first words of the first Sutras generally in those adhikaranas. For example," in the printed text, we get the Sutra of the first adhikarana-gafa' but, the full Sütra runs thus - 'अनुयजतीत्यनुवषट्कारश्चोद्यते' which finally decides that the proposition 'सोमस्या व्रीहोत्यनुयजति' enjoins a new sacrifice to be performed after the Soma Yaga. 
Again, Mr. Sandal's statement that "it (the Samkarṣakanda) is an 
3 For other instances see the Appendix at the end of this paper, 
The Samkarsa Kanda 
293 
Apocryphal portion of the Mimämsä, most probably palmed off by Khāṇḍadeva" is clearly wrong. The Samkarsakāṇḍa, as a prakīrṇaka of the Mimänsä Sastra, was composed by Jaimini, the author of the dvādaśalakṣaṇī. It is referred to by Badarayana, the author of the Vedanta Sutras and has been commented upon by several great writers of the Mimamsa Sastra. According to Samkara, Rāmānuja and other Bhāyakāras, Bādarāyana has cited in his Sūtra - प्रदानवदेव तदुक्तं (iii, 3. 43 ), the approval of the Siddhānta-view of the adhikarana xiv, 2, 
seof the Sks 
On the authority of the Prapancahṛdaya, it appears that the famous Vṛttikara Bodhāyana wrote a Vṛtti on the Sk. This Vṛttikara is identified with Upavarṣa. Tradition holds that Sabarasvamin's 
4 Vide the remarks of Appayya Diksita quoted already under f. n. ante. 
also. तदिदं (.मीमांसाशास्त्र) विशत्यध्याय निबद्धं । तत्र षोडशाध्यायनिबद्धं पूर्वका गडस्य धर्मविचारपरायणं जैमिनिकृतम् । तदन्यदध्याय चतुष्कमुत्तरमीमांसाशास्त्रमुत्तरकाण्डस्य ब्रह्म- विचारपरायणं व्यासकृतम् । Prapañcahydaya, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, p. 30. 
5 Samkara explains Vedanta Sūtra, iii, 3, 43, as follows: 
तस्मात्पृथगेवोपगमनं प्रदानवत् यथा, 'इन्द्राय राशे पुरोडाशमेकादशकपालम् । इन्द्रायाधिरा- लाय. इन्द्राय स्वराशे, इत्यस्यां त्रिपुरोडाशिन्यामिष्टौ, 'सर्वेषामभिगमयन्नवद्यत्यच्छंवटकार' मिति । तो वचनादिन्द्राभेदाच्च सहप्रदानाशङ्कायां राजादिगुणभेदाद्याज्यानुवाक्यान्यत्यासविधानाच्च, यथा न्यासमेव देवता पृथक्त्वात्प्रदानपृथक्त्वं भवति । एवं तत्त्वाभेदेऽपि श्राध्येयांशपृथकृत्वादाध्यान- पृथकत्वमित्यर्थः । तदुक्त संकर्षे - 'नाना वा देवता पृथग्ज्ञानात्' इति । तत्रतु, द्रव्यदेवताभेदाद्याग- भेदों विद्यते । नैवमिह विद्याभेदोऽस्ति ॥ 
Rāmānuja in his sribhāsya explains : प्रदानवदेव, प्रदानवदावर्तनीयमित्यर्थः x x xxx तदुक्त संकर्षणे - 'नाना वा देवता पृथग्ज्ञानात्' इति ॥ Brikantha has the following explanation: 
इन्द्रप्रदानवद्यथा इन्द्राय राशे पुरोडाशमेकादशकपालं. 
स्वराशे इति गुणभेदात्पृथक 
पुरोडाशप्रदानम् । नाना वा देवता पृथग्ज्ञानादिति संकर्षे तथोक्तत्वात् । 
6 तस्य विशत्यध्याय निबद्धस्य मीमांसाशास्त्रस्य कृतकोटिनामधेयं भाव्यं बोधायनेन कृतं सद् न्थबाहुल्यभयादुपेक्ष्य किचित्संज्ञितमुपवर्पेण कृतम् ॥ 
7 My revered Professor Mm. Vidyavacaspati Prof. S. Kuppusvāmi Sāstrigal in his artical—'Bodhāyana and Dramidācārya: Tico Old Tedantins presupposed by Rāmānuja (ul Oriental Conference, Madras) has tried to establish the Bodhāyana-Upavarsa identity. If this identity is acceptable, the Vrtti known as K?takoti, according to literary (sources, belongs to Tpavarga. Hence, the passage from the Prapancakedaya 
294 
The Samkarsa Kanda 
bhāṣya covers also the S. Bhavauāsa, one of the famous Vṛttskāras has written a bhāṣya or vṛtti on the Mimamsa Sutras, which is now unfortunately lost to us; and this also covers all the 16 chapters." 
Devasvamin, probably the famous author of the Bhasya on the Aśralayanasrautasutra, has commented on the 16 chapters of the Pūrvamīmāmṣāsūtras. His bhāṣya is described in the Prapancahṛdaya as a beautiful summary of the bhasya of Upavarga," and is the only ancient commentary on this Kanda, now available in manuscript. Rājacūḍāmaņi Dikṣita, a reputed author in the Parramimamsä Sästra and other branches of knowledge, has also written a commentary, known as Samkarṣa-nyāyamuktāvali.“ Lastly, Bhaskararāya has written his Bhaṭṭacandrika on the model of Khandadeva's Bhāṭṭudipika on the Drādaśalakṣaṇī. All these categorically accept the S. as genuine. 
Now it is to be examined whether Khandadeva has commented ov the Sk. If we take the opening verse in the Bhaṭṭacandrika of the Sk. 
cited above, is to be interpreted in the sense that Bodhayana who is none other than Upavarṣa wrote a summary of his own Vṛtti and called it Krtakoți. 
8 Contrary to this traditional view, the Prapancahydaya holds that Sabarasvamin has not commented on the Samkarsa Kanda and one Samkarsa or Samkarsana has written a bhaṣya on it--- 
पुनः द्विकाण्डे धर्ममीमांसाशास्त्रे पूर्वस्य तन्त्र काण्डस्याचार्यशबरस्वामिनः तिस्संक्षेपेण संकर्षकाराडं द्वितीयमुपेक्ष्य कृतं भाष्यम् । तथा देवताकाण्डस्यैव संकर्षेण ( शंकर्षणेन -- ग. पाट: ) । 
Prapancahrdaya, p. 39. 
9 The Prapancahydaya remarks on p. 39, भवदासेनापि कृतं जैमिनीयभाष्यं ( षोडशाध्याय परिमितं ). 
Devasvamin also in his bhasya on XV. 11, 1, says, 
afenzaik ‘Agaiaan diz:' zarzanagqftaærà: wagraùa urcafafa i 
10 तदपि ( उपवर्षभाष्यमपि ) मन्दमतीन्प्रति दुष्प्रतिपादं विस्तीर्णत्वादित्युपेक्ष्य पोडशलक्षण- पूर्वमीमांसाशास्त्रमात्रस्य देवस्वामिना श्रतिसंक्षिप्तं कृतम् Prapañcahydaya, p. 39. 
It is Devasvamin's bhāṣya and not Sabarasvamin's, which is constantly referred to by Bhāskararāya in his Bhāṭṭacundrikā; and references to an ācārys and rrttikyt found in Devasvamin's bhāṣya and the Bhattacandrika, might b in all probabilities to the famous Vṛttikāra Upavarga, who has commented on this Kanda. 
11 This work is noticed by Dr. Hultzsch in his Reports of South Indian Mss., vol. II, No. 1489,The Samkarsa Kanda 
goza âfafayfà eveèagzanfag i 
अनुग्रहाय मन्दानां संग्रहोऽयं विधीयते ॥ 
295 
authentic, then it is clear that Khandadeva has written a commentary this Kanda, a summary of which has been afterwards written by Bhaskararaya. But the concluding verses in the Bhaṭṭacandrika-- 
खण्डदेवकृतभाट्टदीपिका लक्षणः कतिपयैरसंभृता । 
gcyqtau gu menofafag-unał aftutiaya ang || अद्यावधि कृतिरेषा (आ) द्यन्तविहीनेति दीपिकाख्यासीत् । षोडशकला भिरधुना परिपूर्णा भाट्टचन्द्रिकात्वमगात् ॥ 
ve us a different idea, viz. Khandadeva has not commented upon e Sk. 
We have got no tangible evidence as yet to prove handadeva's authorship of any works on this Kanda. 
12 
Mr. Sandal observes that "Bhaskara has dedicated his work in the 
game of his masters and called it Bhaṭṭacandrika after the Bhaṭṭadīpikā of his preceptor". That Bhaskara was the disciple of Khandadeva Cannot be accepted. Evidences are available to prove that Khandadeva, The Mimāmsā teacher of Perubhatta, flourished in the beginning of the 17th century, while Bhaskararaya, son of Gambhiraraya Dīkṣita lived at a later age. If he were one of the disciples of Khandadeva, he would have certainly referred to his 'guru' in terms like 'pujya-pāda' 8 Sambhubhaṭṭa has done. From Bhaskara's concluding verses already bited, we are able to gather that he was a great admirer of Khandadeva and his works and as such, wrote his Candrika a commentary on the Bhaṭṭadipika and a commentary on the Samkarṣa sūtras. 
12 Khandadeva was the Mimasã teacher of Perubhatta, the father of Jagannatha, Pandita, and not of Jagannatha Pandita, as Mr. Sandal has observed In his Introduction, p. xi. The second and third verses in the beginning of the Rasagangadhara clearly prove this view. The yaccabda in the second 
gafaunedì 4: goes along with 'tacchabda' in the third verse- तं वन्दे पेरुभट्टाख्यं लक्ष्मीकान्तं महागुरुम् ' 'This Perubhatta, the hushand of Taksmi, -as Nageśa's Commentary notes, is undoubtedly the father of Jagannatha Pandita, the author of the Rasagangalhara, the Five Laharis, the Bhaminivilāsa and other minor works. 
rerse- 
13 It is possible that Bhaskararaya, the author of the Samkarsabhalṭacandrikā is identical with the author of the Candrika or Candrodaya, a commentary on 
296 
The Samkarsa Kāṇḍa 
Mr. Sandal's arguments (2), (3), (4), and (5) do not contain suffi cient evidences to prove that the Samkarsa Kanda is a spurious work. We have already cited six authors of the Pūrvamimāmsā Sāstra of whom at least five have undoubtedly commented upon this Kanda-a fact wihch would well prove its genuineness as a supplement to the Dradasalakṣani. In the light of these, we cannot accept Mr. Sandal's conclusion which is based on the sole reason that Alberuni, Abul Fazal and Madhava, the author of the Sarva-darśana-samgraha have no 
referred to it. 
Mr. Sandal's sixth argument is that "the style of the Samkarga Kanda is so curt and mutilated that without the help of the Commentary one cannot understand it' etc. All sutras, as a rule, are curt and are not intelligible without a commentary. As for his opinion that they are mutilated, we are afraid that he is not in full possession of the sutras. We have given in the Appendix some full sutras which were collected and reconstructed from references. 
Mr. Sandal's seventh argument supports our view. The repetitioù of the phrase : at the end of the Samkarsa Kandu clearly shows that the Samkarsa closes the Purva-māmāṇish Sastra; for, we do not find any such repetition in the las sutra of the twelfth chapter. In this respect, Jaimini migb have followed some of his predecessors in the field of Mimamsā or some Kalpasūtrakāras. Mr. Sandal's observation that Jaimini has either followed the Samkhya-pravacana-sutra or 
Vedantasūtra' 
baseless. 
the 
(1) There is a theory prevalent among scholars that the availabl Samkhya-pravacana-sutras are not the genuine sutras of Kapila and they are the productions of Vijñānabhikṣu who flourished during th 14th century. Jaimini could not have any access to these sutras. 
tha 
the Bhaṭṭadipika. It may also be said here that the same. Bhaskararaya ha composed a minor work on Mimāmsā--Matvarthalakṣaṇāvicāra and Vaidikakosa in verse, both now preserved in the Tanjore Mahārāja Serfe Sarasvati Mahal Library. 
14 Compare:- 
अल्पाक्षरमसन्दिग्धं सारवद्विश्वतोमुखम् । 
अस्तोभमनवद्यञ्च सूत्रं सूत्रविदो विदुः ॥ 
The Samkarsa Kanda 
297 
(2) In the Feduntasutra there is the repetition of the word at the end of each pada and adhyaya and the whole sutra is repeated at the end of the Sastra. Such a practice is not followed.15 
The Samkarsa Kanda is a valuable work in the Mimāmsā literature and is more in the nature of the Kalpasūtras. Unlike the Dvadasalakṣani, the Samkarṣa Kanda has not got any separate prin- ciple to enunciate and, therefore, is a miscellaneous supplement. It attempts at a further application of the principles already enunciated in the twelve chapters, to other examples in the Vedas, which may not be otherwise easily intelligible. Even within many adhyāyas one and the same principle is enunciated and discussed with reference to different illustrations with a view to widening the application of the rule of interpretation in question to the vast field of the Vedas and other texts of unquestionable authority on the eternal dharma. In this sense it is a Kalpasūtra but there is this main difference that the Mimāmsā enquires whether this particular thing is to be accepted in this particular way, while all Kalpasütras are generally mere com- pendiums of ritualistic informations found scattered in the various branches or recensions of the Vedas, all of which the Vedic students are not allowed or have no time to study. 
III Appendix 
The Sk. consists of four adhyayas, each adhyaya being subdivided into four padas, and each pada again subdivided into a number of Adhikaranas or Nyayas as follows:- 
Adhyaya 
Pādas 
I 
2 
Total 
3 
4 
XIII 
15 
18 
24 
27 
84 
XIV 
41 
18 
15 
30 
IC4 
XV 
25 
36 
20 
14 
95 
XVI 
13 
19 
22 
10 
64 
Adhikaranas 347 
15 According to Devasvamin's bhasya on the Sk., there is repetition of a word or of a phrase at the end of the second chapter (XIVth chapter) of the Samkarsa. If this is reliable, this practice of the Sūtrakāra does not help us to definitely say whom he has followed. 
1.H.Q., MARCH, 1933 
38 
298 
The Samkarṣa Kānda 
The following full Sutras constituting various Adhikaranas in the Sk. are collected and reconstructed from Appayya Dikṣita's Vedanta- kalpataru-parimala and Vasudeva Dikṣita's Adh varmīmāmsākuṭühala- 
vrtti. 
(1) Adhyāya XIII. 1.1 zgasdługa¶zare: aìuà (V.K.P., N.S. Ed. p. 838). 
(2) Adhyāya XIII. 3. 2 ( 1 ) सह कुम्भीभिरतिक्रामन्नाहेति 
सह कुम्भीभिरतिकामन्नाहेति स्रु कुप्रत्याम्नायः श्रूयते यथा पलाशस्य मध्यमेन पर्णेन जुहोति ( पूर्वपक्षः ) (2) दारुपात्राणि कुम्भीभिर्विकल्प्येरन् एकार्थत्वात् 
( श्राशङ्का ), 
( 3 ) प्रवृत्तस्य प्रदानस्य पात्रनिधानात् अपनयो यथा पालीवतं पर्यभिकृतमुत्सृजेत् (सिद्धान्तः ) । 
[AMK, Trtti, Vanivilas Edn., Sri Rangam. Madras, p. 398]. 
(3) Adh. XIII. 3 ( 1 
) 
तत्र शेषकार्याणि क्रियेरन् पात्रान्यत्वात् ( पूर्वपक्षः), 
( 2 
) 
नापनीतेषु श्रुतत्वात् तत् व्याख्यातम् ( सिद्धान्तः ), 
[AMK, Trtti, p. 398] 
(4) XIV. 2.2 ( 1 ) 
तत्र देवतानामादेशो न विद्यते श्रनाम्नातत्वात् ( पूर्वपक्षः), 
(2) 
विद्यते वा अन्यार्थदर्शनेभ्यः ( सिद्धान्तः ), 
(3) 
आम्नातः प्रयाजेषु देवतादेशः, तस्य प्रतिषेधो वचनमितरेषु 
( गुणसूत्राशङ्का ), 
(4) आनातो वैकेषां तद्दर्शयत्यमुप्मा श्रनु ह्यमुं यज ( गुणसूत्राशङ्का- 
निरास: ) । 
[AMK, Vrtti, p. 160] 
(5) XIV. 2.14 (1) तेषां पृथक्कृतानां निरवदानं यथाऽन्येषां हविःपृथक्त्वात् 
( पूर्वपक्ष: ), 
( 2 ) वचनात्सर्वेषां सह श्रवदीयेत ( सिद्धान्तः ) । 
[VKP, p. 838]. 
(6) XIV. 2.15 (1) 
तेषां पृथक्प्रदानं अवदानेकत्वात् (पूर्वपक्षः), 
(2) 
नाना वा देवता पृथक्ज्ञानात् (नाना वा पृथक् ज्ञानात् ; नाना वा देवता पृथक्त्वात् ) ( सिद्धान्तः ), 
(3) अन्यार्थ प्रदर्शनाच्च ( गुणसूत्रम् ) । 
[VKP, pp. 838-9] 
The Samkarsa Kanda 
( 7 ) XIV. 4. 1 ( 1 ) देवतासंयोगेन चोद्यमाने प्रदान ग्राहुतिः यथा लोके । 
299 
[AMK, Tņtti, p. 300]. 
(8) XIV. 4.2 (1) श्रदेवतासंयोगेन चोद्यमानेऽर्थगृहीता यथा भोजनचोदनायां 
मनुष्ययोगः । 
[AMK, Fatti, p. 2881. 
(9) XIV. 4.3 (1) सूक्तवाको याज्याप्रस्तराहुतीरिध्मः प्रथम आहुतीनां हूयते 
इत्येतेन व्याख्यातम् ( पूर्वपज्ञः ), 
(2) प्रशंसा वा संस्कारः प्रस्तरस्य सन्निधानात् समिन्धनार्थ इध्मः 
( सिद्धान्तः ) । [AMK, Prtti, p. 288]. 
(10) XIV. 4.27 (1) 
(2) 
ऋताषाट् ऋतधामेति यथार्थविनिष्कर्षोऽर्थ पृथक्त्वात् ( पूर्वपक्षः), यथा समानानं वा (सिद्धान्तः) । 
[AMK, Vņtti, p. 150]. 
[AMK, Tatti, p. 150]. 
1 (11) XIV. 4.28 (1) पभिर्जुहोतीति पर्यायवादो यथा सावित्राणि जुहोति । 
(12) XVI. 2.1 (1) (... ..... ) garden: ( gâva: ), 
( 2 ) प्रकृतित इत्याश्मरथ्यः ( सिद्धान्तः ) । 
[AMK, Vetti, p. 269]. 
(13) XVI. 4.10 (1) पशावुत्तमे प्रयाजे स्रुगादापनो न विद्यते संप्रेषितत्वात् (पूर्वपज्ञः), (2) विद्यते वा अन्यकालत्वात् यथा याज्यासंप्रेषो यथा यज्यासंप्रषः 
( सिद्धान्तः ) । 
[AMK, Tytti, p. 838]. 
V. A. RAJMASVAMI SASTRI