REVIEWS 
SANKARŞAKANDA of Jaimini with the Bhasya of Devasvamin, edited critically with Introduction and Appendices by S. Subrahmanya SASTRI, University of Madras, 1965, pp. xiii+xxxviii+260, Price Rs. 3-0-0. 
A critical edition of the Sankarṣakanda Chapter I (text only) was brought out by K. V. SARMA as V. J. Series-18 with an Introduction, critical notes, an Appendix, and the Sutra Index in March 1963; and ever since that date scholars in the Mimämsä Sästra in particular have been eagerly unwaiting the appearance in print of the whole work. This expectation has been in a way fulfilled by Shri S. Subrahmanya SASTRI, Reader in Sanskrit, University of Madras, by bringing out an edition of the full text of this Kanda (all the four chapters) together with a well- known commentary on it-the Bhasya of Devasvamin. 
Besides the original sutras and the Bhasya thereon by Devasvamin, the edition contains an Introduction (in English and also in Sanskrit) discussing relevant topics and also giving the contents of the whole Kanda, by analysing the subject matter adhikarana by adhikarana. In the end are given three Appendices, containing (i) Index of Sutras, (ii) Index of citations, and (iii) Index of Sankarṣakanda sutras quoted in other works. 
For a long time the authenticity (or rather genunineness) of these four chapters itself was questioned; and it is only recently that a strong case has been made for the Sankarṣakanda to be admitted as a genuine portion of the work of Jaimini. The present edition of this work together with an ancient commentary on it can be said to have decided the question finally, though that does not mean that all problems concerning this work have been finally settled. 
The most important among these problems yet awaiting final solution is the settling of the text of the sutras. There is a good deal of disparity between the sutras in this work and those in the other twelve chapters (usually accepted as the only genuine chapters) of Jaimini's work (and also other kindred sutra works). Some peculiarities of this work have been noticed by the editor; and a few more can be easily gathered by a glance through the edition. The main source of difficulty, however, in this respect, arises out of the fact that in all the available MSS. the sutras and the bhasya are so mixed up that it becomes often very difficult, if not altogether impossible to distinguish and determine the exact text and extent of the sutras. In some MSS., only the adhikaraṇasutras are given, so that the difficulty arises regarding the remaining sutras of the adhikarana, which in the commentary are mostly represented by their pratikas only. Unfortunately no MS, containing the complete sutras text in full, has been found; and this makes the settling of the sutrapatha all the more difficult. 
43 
INDIAN ANTIQUARY 
The editor has explained the criteria on the basis of which he has tried to restore almost all the individual sutras and thus arrived at the full text of the sutrapatha. Inspite of his best efforts, however, the sutrapatha cannot be said to have been finally settled. Thus, for example, at I. 2.3 the editor has adopted the reading lingac ca as against the sutrapatha MS reading lingadarsanac ca ( given in the foot-note). Apparently there seems to be some confusion regarding these two readings in the mind of the editor; and this has resulted in the curious phenomenon that out of a dozen places given in Appendix A for the sutra lingadarśanac ca, six are found to read lingac ca. Similarly at I. 3. 19 the editor in a foot-note notices reading gunäptikārāt as the reading of the sutrapatha MS; but without giving any thought to it he has chosen to read the sutra as gunavikāro hi, on what authority it is hard to understand. The MS reading referred to above could well have been adopted with a slight emendation as gunadvikärät. One more case of what may be described as unjustified editorial activity is found at I. 4:42 where the editor has added a whole clause, namely, yatha śurpena juhoti iti, though it is altogether absent in the SP MS. The emendation at I. 3. 49, however, is quise legitimate, though the same can hardly be said of the emendations made and readings adopted in several other places. 
A word must also be said about the editing of the bhāṣya, which appears to be the only ancient commentary that is available in full at present. Here the most intriguing point is the remark at the beginning of the commentary on III. 2. 1. 
Shri SASTRI'S view (Introduction p. v), concerning this remark is 'that they must be the words of the scribe who copied the whole work; who not finding the bhasya of Devasvamin upon that pada, would have copied the bhasya of Bhavadasa for that portion alone'. Here one must first try to determine what portion actually constitutes the bhāṣya of Bhavadāsa. 
A careful perusal of the passage in question will clearly show that the remark we are now considering has occurred (and been printed even in this edition) just at the beginning of the commentary on III. 2. 1; and this naturally leads one to think that by the words asmin pade, the writer must be referring to III. 2 only. This view (which appears to be shared by the editor also), however, is not correct. The author of the remark, whoever he is, has made quite clear the limits of the Bhavadasiya bhāṣya by quoting the sutra from where it (the bhäṣya) commences and by declaring that it runs upto the end of that pada. This clearly shows that the bhasya under discussion pertains to that pada where the sutra mentioned by him (namely apurvāt tathā some) is found. Now since that sutra is found (in the edition under review) in III. 1 (after sutra 29?), it follows that the Bhavadasiya bhāṣya mentioned in the above remark must be the bhāṣya from III. 1. 29 (or 30?) up to the end of that pāda. In the light of this situation now we can understand that the remark asmin päde etc. pertains to the päda just ended (and not one just commenced). This 
44 
REVIEWS 
also explains why the remark has come just at the beginning of III. 2. 1 fact, the proper place for this remark would be at the end of the bhas on III. 1. 44 which is referred to by the words a padasamäpteḥ in that remar The editor seems to be quite aware of this fact that the sutra apurva et is in III. 1 and not in III. 2. But he is misled by the position of the rema: under discussion which appears in MSS under III. 2. 1. Hence it is that I has remarked: This sutra is not found in this pāda (i. e. in III. 2) but found in pada 1 (i. e. III. 1). To convey the proper significance of t remark under discussion, the editor would have done well to print it the concluding sentence of the bhasya on III. 1. 44, or better still, to hat relegated it to a foot-note with an apt remark. It is not part of a bhāṣya at all! By the way, this also would show that the sutra, apurvati tathä some, presents a problem which has not been properly handled in th edition. For, the editor has merely relegated it to a foot-note, witho clarifying its position in any way. 
On going through the bhasya itself one finds there a few misprin which, however, can be easily corrected and hence need not detain us he There are, however, several places where the editor could do nothing bett than leave the text in a loconic condition. 
All this, however, does not minimise the value of the work und review, which has its own importance, not only in the field of Mimämsä b even in that of Srauta ritual. The editor deserves hearty thanks fro scholars interested in these fields in particular for having provided the with a practically complete edition of this important work with a gc Introduction and useful Appendices. 
45 
-G. V. DEVASTHAL