Reprinted from Acta Asiatica No. 57 (1989) 
with the permission of the Tōhō Gakkai. 
Notes on the Sankarṣa-kanda: Under Stimulus from the Article by Lariviere* 
KANAZAWA Atsushi 
Today research on the Sankarṣa-kāṇḍa (SK) ought to present a rather complex aspect. This should be no problem as long as one confines oneself to research on the contents of the SK as it is presently available together with the commentaries by Devasvamin and Bhaskararaya." But the moment one starts to tackle such questions as its "designation," "author," "commen- tators" and "position in the history of Indian philosophy," one will encounter various unexpected difficulties. In other words, it may frequently be the case that the researcher will proceed with his discussion without having been able to clearly establish the meaning of the word "Sankarṣa-kāṇḍa" or without any clear grasp of what he is actually discussing. 
Sutras from the present SK are quoted twice, together with the reference "Sankarşe," in Sabarasvamin's Bhasya on the Mimämsäsūtra (MS)," and this fact in itself guarantees the authenticity of the present SK. In addition, Sankara himself cites another sutra from the present SK in his commentary on the BrS III. 3. 43, also together with the word "Sankarse." Hence, provided that these passages in the currently available Sabara-Bhasya and Sankara-Bhāṣya do not represent later interpolations, it is to be assumed that subsequent scholars of the Mimämsä school and Vedanta school, who would have nurtured their own ideas through the works of Sabara and Sankara respectively, would have as a matter of course set their eyes on this "San- karşe" and the accompanying quotations. But strangely enough, in the former 
The present paper represents a translation of our "Sankarsa-kāṇḍa o meguru shomondai- Mimämsä kenkyu josetsu" Sankarşa-kāṇḍa-Mimämsä 
(An intro- ductory study of the Mimämsä: Problems relating to the Sankarşa-kāṇḍa; Tōyō Gakuhō ###, Vol. 67, Nos. 3-4, March 1986, pp. 356-322), Section III (pp. 340-331), together with the accompanying notes (pp. 328-323). 
1) SK, SK2 and SK3. SK1 is accompanied by Bhaskararāya's (18th c. A.D.) commentary Bhaṭṭacandrika; SK2 represents the only manuscript, although incomplete, of sütras alone; and SK3 is accompanied by Devasvamin's (11th c. A.D.?) commentary. Details on Devasvamin are uncertain. Cf. R. W. Lariviere, "Madhyamamimāmsā-The Sankarṣakända," WZKS, Bd. 25, 1981, pp. 179-194; P. K. Aithal, "Devasvamin: A Forgotten Jurist?," Indology and Law, (Wiesbaden, 1982), pp. 106-119. 
2) Cf. MD, vi, p. 387, 11. 14-15; vii, p. 165, 11. 23-24. 
3) Cf. BrSSBh1, p. 839, 1. 3; BrSSBh2, p. 756, 1. 3. 
31 
32 
KANAZAWA ATSUSHI 
school they were completely ignored. In the case of the latter school, on the other hand, the same sūtra would be quoted with considerable conscien- tiousness, when compared with the former school, time and again," and there were even instances where brief explanatory comments were added on "San- karşe," the apparent title of the source of these sutras. Furthermore, Rāmānuja, who composed the commentary Śri-Bhāṣya on the BrS from the Visiṣṭādvaita viewpoint, differing from that of Sankara, also quotes the same verse at the same place as Sankara together with the reference "Sankarṣane." In addi- tion to the above three sutras, a considerable number of sutras to be found in the present SK have also been retrieved from other works." 
One may assume that the authors of these works were able to refer directly to a version of the SK presumably identical with that currently available or that they were fairly reliably informed about it. Thus research on the SK today should be developed on the basis of the information provided by these works, and we believe that there is a need for the "designation," "author," "commenta- tors" and "position in the history of Indian philosophy" of this SK to be questioned and clarified. But it would appear that even those works that quote sutras from the present SK and thereby directly guarantee its authen- ticity are not necessarily of any assistance in answering these demands. Of course, the material for elucidating these various problems concerning the SK is not limited to that noted above, and as a matter of fact a large amount of additional material has been discovered, reported on and discussed.8) Among this material, that which has until now provided the most abundant information on the SK is the following passage in the anonymous Prapañcahṛ- daya (PH).9) 
i) tatra sāngopangasya vedasya pūrvottarakaṇḍasambhinnasyāśeṣavākyārtha- 
vicāraparāyaṇam mīmāmsāśāstram/ tad idam vimśatyadhyayanibaddham 
4) There are, nevertheless, some scholars in later times who do occasionally mention the SK, such as Someśvara who refers to it in his commentary on Kumārila's TnV (NS, p. 145, 1. 27). 
5) The various commentaries on the BrS almost invariably quote the same sutra as that quoted by Sankara (i.e., SK II. 2. 36). 
6) Cf. SriBh ad BrS III. 3. 42: SriBh1, ii, p. 734, 11. 1-2. 
7) Cf. V. A. Ramasvami Sastri, "Further Light on Sankarṣa-kāṇḍa," Siddha Bharati, II (Hoshiarpur, 1950), pp. 102-105; SK2, Appendix; SK3, Appendix C; etc. 
8) Cf. Lariviere, op. cit. 
(A tentative study of the 
& 
9) Cf. Kanazawa, "Prapañcahrdaya shiron" Prapañcahṛdaya Prapancahrdaya), Komazawa Daigaku Bukkyo Gakubu Kenkyu Kiyo 
, No. 44, March 1986, pp. 398-377. In this paper the writer points out that the PH, which had previously never been made the subject of any study, contains a not inconsiderable number of quotations from the Prapancasăratantra, and he also discusses the possible date of its composition. 
NOTES ON THE SANKARṢA-KĀŅDA 
33 
tatra şoḍaśadhyayanibaddham pūrvamimāmsāśāstram pūrvakāṇḍasya dharmavicaraparāyaṇam Jaiminikṛtam tadanyadadhyayacatuṣkam uttara- mīmāmsāśāstram uttarakāṇḍasya brahmavicaraparāyaṇam Vyasakṛtam tasya vimsatyadhyayanibaddhasya mīmāmṣāśāstrasya kṛtakoṭināmadheyam bhāṣyam Bodhāyanena kṛtam tad granthabahulyabhayad upekṣya kiñcit samkṣiptam Upavarṣena kṛtam tad api mandamatin prati duşpratipādam vistīrṇatvād ity upekṣya ṣoḍaśalakṣaṇapūrvamīmāmsāśāstramātrasya Deva- svāminātisamkṣiptam kṛtam/ Bhavadasenapi kṛtam Jaiminiyabhāṣyam/ punar dvikāṇḍe dharmamimamsāśāstre pūrvasya tantrakāṇḍasyācārya- Sabarasvāminātisamkṣepena sankarṣakāṇḍam dvitiyam upekṣya kṛtam bhāṣyam tatha devatākāṇḍasya Sankarṣena brahmakāṇḍasya Bhagavat- pada BrahmadattaBhāskarādibhir matabhedenāpi kṛtam/ (PH, p. 38, 1. 14-p. 39, 1.12) 
Together with a schematic outline of the Mimāmsā, this passage contains a concise account of the position, author, commentators and contents of the SK. It is no exaggeration to say that, among researchers who have up until now undertaken to write something on the history of the Mimāmsā, there is not one who has not shared in the benefits of this work. The fact that the Sarvasiddhantasamgraha (SSS) and Sarvamatasamgraha (SMS), from which the following two passages are taken, have also been valuable sources of in- formation is attested to by the many existing studies.10) 
ii) vimśatyadhyayayukta sa pratipadyarthato dvidha 
karmārthā pūrvamīmāmsā dvādaśādhyāyavistṛtā//17// asyām sūtram Jaiminiyam Sabaram bhāṣyam asya tu mīmāmṣāvārttikam Bhaṭṭam Bhaṭṭācāryakṛtam hi tat//18// 
bhavaty uttaramīmāmsā tv aṣṭādhyayi dvidha ca sa devatajñānakāṇḍābhyam Vyāsasūtram dvayos samam//20// purvādhyāyacatuşkena mantravācyātra devatā Sankarṣaṇoditā tad dhi devatākāṇḍam ucyate//21// (SSS, pp. 2-3) 
10) Although the dates of the PH, SSS and SMS are not clear, we here wish to briefly touch upon the relationship between these three works. Rāmānuja (11th-12th c. A.D.) is mentioned in neither the PH nor SSS; the PH mentions Devasvamin (11th c. A.D.?), who wrote a com- mentary on the SK; the SMS also contains a quotation which would appear to derive from the SSS; the SMS refers to Rāmānuja; the author of the SMS may be considered to have been acquainted with both the PH and SSS; and although the PH does not mention Ramanuja, there are reasons for believing that it postdates (or was contemporaneous with?) Rāmānuja. Cf. n. 9). 
! 
34 
iii) 
KANAZAWA ATSUSHI 
evam purvottarakāṇḍātmanā bhinnasya vedasyadhyayanavidhiparigrhitat- vad vivakṣitārthatvena niścitasyārthavicārāya mīmāmsāśāstram pravṛttam tac ca vimsatyadhyayaparimitam kāṇḍatrayatmakam bhavati tatra pūrvamimāmsā dvādaśadhyayamitā karmakāṇḍaniṣṭha tatsūtrakartta Jaiminiḥ .. uttaramīmāmsā tu dvirūpā sagunanirguṇabrahmaniṣṭhā aṣṭadhyayamita Vyasapraṇīta tatra saguṇabrahmaniṣṭha devatākāṇḍātmi- kādhyāyacatuṣṭayavati... evam madhyamamīmāmsā sarvadevatātmano hareḥ pratipadiketi saguṇabrahmapară bhavati nirgunabrahmaniṣṭha sapi caturadhyayamita). pravṛttam... prati devatākāṇḍam pravṛttam/ kandam pravṛttam.../ (SMS, pp. 10-11) 
jñānakāṇḍātmikä tu 
prati karmakāṇḍam 
... 
adhikṛtya brahma- 
which 
In his recent paper "Madhyamamimāmsä-The Sankarṣakāṇḍa," gives the impression of having summarized all previous research on this enigmatic SK, R. W. Lariviere writes as follows: "In any case the designa- tions sankarșa, or sankarṣaṇa, devatā, and upāsana [sic] seem to have been interchangeable in various texts. Whether or not all these designations referred to the same set of Sūtras is another question."12) It is the examination of this "other question" that constitutes the primary objective of the present paper. It is, in other words, a question of whether or not the SK, Sankarṣaṇa- kāṇḍa, Devatā-kāṇḍa and Upāsanā-kāṇḍa (and also Madhyama-kāṇḍa), alluded to in various works as if they referred to the same work (or parts of the same work), do actually all signify the same work (or parts of the same work). In a word, we wish to devise a means to determine the truth of the variously recorded traditions, and at the same time we shall present some new material and also briefly state our views on methodological questions relating to the historical study of the Mimämsā. 
Even on the basis of the material that has been made available to date, the present writer is of the opinion that it should be considered that there definitely did exist a work called the SK, Sankarṣaṇa-K, Devată-K or Upāsanā- K other than the present SK. This may be assumed to be so even if one takes into account the fact that the people who have left records of the SK may in fact have been transmitting erroneous information on this work without actually having seen the work in question. It is possible to look upon the SK that was in the minds of the authors of the PH and SMS, both works which today provide us with important information on the SK but which are unfortunately anonymous, as having been different from the present SK. Both 
11) Cf. n. 1.). 
12) Lariviere, op. cit., p. 183, II. 17-20. 
NOTES ON THE SANKARṢA-KANDA 
35 
describe the SK as consisting of four chapters, as does the present SK. Although i) gives Devasvamin as the commentator, when one considers that both these works describe the contents of the four chapters in similar terms, it is probably more natural to regard it as a work differing from the present SK.13) (Or is one to consider that they are based on a commentary or ex- position grounded in a standpoint completely different from that of Devasvamin?) There is, in addition, as is noted by Lariviere,14) a work from which "sa vişnur aha hi" is quoted together with the designation Deva-sastra in Madhva's Anuvyākhyāna.15) Judging from the comments of S. Siauve, who edited and translated this text, and of Lariviere who remarked upon it, this Deva-sastra would seem to begin, according to the commentator Jayatirtha (to whom the present writer has yet unfortunately been unable to refer), with "athāto daivi (jijñāsā?)" and, following "sa vişnur aha hi," to end with "tam brahmety acakṣate."16) These three sutras are, needless to say, not to be found in the present SK. However, K. V. Sarma, the editor of SK2, has already given us a precise description of the latter two of these three sutras.17) According to Sarma, these two sutras were preceded by a sutra reading "ante harau taddarśanāt.” As is only to be expected, Sarma adds the comment that "the authenticity of this and the next two sutras as to whether they really belong to the 'present' Sankarşa Kāṇḍa is doubtful."18) Yet Lariviere, who ought to have been aware of this comment by Sarma, while noting and commenting on the passage in Siauve's above-mentioned work, did not attempt to consider it in conjunction with Sarma's comment. In this regard, M. Itō too has the following comment to make: "Furthermore, in his Sataduṣani, p. 151-2, and Tattvaṭikā, p. 449-11, he [=Vedantadeśika] holds that there were three sutras not to be found in the extant S. K. in the upasamhāra of the present work [=S.K.]. The final sutra, tam brahmety acakṣate," would seem to link up rather smoothly with the first sutra of the Brahmasutra, and referring to the Purva- and Uttara-mimāmsā as the Kabandha- and Rāhu- mimāmsā (Adhikaraṇasārāvali, p. 248-11; Paramatabhanga II, pp. 245–246), he emphasizes their unity. The clarification of whether or not they represent an interpolation by him [=Vedāntadeśika] must await further careful ex- 
66 
13) For details on the content of the present SK, see SK3, pp. x-xlii. Cf. PH, p. 41, l. 18- 42, 1. 3; SMS, p. 10, 11. 14-20. 
14) Lariviere, op. cit., pp. 183-184, n. 20. 
15) Cf. AnuV, p. 23, 11. 7-8. 
16) Compare these with the present SK. Cf. SK3, pp. 1, 220. 
17) SK2, Appendix, p. 18, II. 5-11. 
18) Ibid., p. 18, n. 1.36 
KANAZAWA ATSUSHI 
22 
amination in the future."19) The three sutras here alluded to by Itō are those cited above, namely, "ante harau taddarśanāt,' sa viṣṇur aha hi" and "tam brahmety acakṣate." Vedāntadeśika's own words are as follows: "evam tarkite karmani sankarṣaṇakāṇḍe caturlakṣaṇyā tattatkarmārādhyadevataiva svarūpa- bhedaguṇaprakarṣaiḥ nirākṛṣyata/ tatsamaptau ca, ante harau taddarśanāt,' 'sa viṣṇur aha hi,' 'tam brahmety acakṣate tam brahmety acakṣate' iti vicara- yiṣyamānam upacikṣpya (upakṣipyata) iti tattvavṛddhāḥ/. Itō does not appear to have taken note of Lariviere's comment, and confronted with the same situation as Sarma, he closes simply with the comment that "the clari- fication of whether or not they represent an interpolation by him must await further careful examination in the future."'21) It is interesting to note the three different reactions of Lariviere, Sarma and Ito. In connection with the SK, also known as the Devatā-K, Lariviere evinces an interest in what is referred to as the Deva-sastra, while Itō links the Sankarṣaṇa-K mentioned by Vedāntadesika (i.e., the above three sutras) directly to the present SK. The conclusion to be drawn from all this is that a work containing the above four sutras and designated by Madhva as the Deva-sastra was connected by Vedāntadeśika with the title Sankarṣaṇa-K. It would seem reasonable to assume that there did exist a work which, according to Jayatirtha, clearly dealt with the subject of daivi, was able to link up directly with an inquiry into brahman, and, in addition, could be called the Devatā-K or Sankarṣaṇa- K, differing completely from the present SK. May we not consider that there definitely did exist a work called the Deva-sastra, beginning with athato and ending with the reiteration of an identical phrase, even though only four sūtras from it have been retrieved to date? (Or are we still to posit the ex- istence of a version of the SK differing from the present SK and containing these four sutras?) 22 Rather than point to the present SK, the SK and Devatā-K as described in the PH and SMS may in fact correspond to this Deva-sastra. In particular, the explanation "sarvadevatātmano hareḥ prati- pādiketi saguṇabrahmapară bhavati "23) in the SMS would seem to be in perfect consonance with these four sutras. It may also be pointed out that the fact that not one single sutra from the present SK has been found among 
19) Itō Michiya, "Sankarṣa-Kāṇḍa ni tsuite" Sankarṣa-Kaṇḍa (On the Sankarşa-Kāṇḍa), Ronshu, No. 11, 1984, p. 175b, 11. 2-10. 
20) TT, p. 44, 11. 9-11. Cf. Sataduṣani (UVG, 1974), p. 15, l. 1-2. 
21) This would appear to be based on Ito's mistaken reading of (or his not having read) the above quotation from Vedāntadeśika. 
22) As a matter of fact, S. Subrahmanya Sastri had already made a clear statement on the three sutras in question prior to the three writers mentioned here. Cf. Abhogaḥ-Kalpataru- Vyakhyā by Laksminṛsimha (Madras, 1955), pp. xix-xx. 
23) Cf. quotation iii) above (p. 34). 
NOTES ON THE SANKARṢA-KÄNDA 
37 
the works of Vedantadeśika,24) who today through his many works provides us with valuable information on the SK, Sankarṣaṇa-K, etc., probably indicates that he did not have direct access to the present SK, and it is also possible that he knew of the above Deva-śästra too only at second hand. Both the expressions "Sankarṣa"25) and "Sankarṣaṇa-K"26) appear in his works, and there are also quotations from works referred to as the "Sankarṣaṇa-Samhita"2") It should and "Sankarṣaṇa,"28) which would appear to be related to these. not be possible for one to incorporate into research on the present SK the various references by Vedantadeśika to the SK without answering the ques- tion of whether or not these all refer to the same work. 
"230) 
In addition, Lariviere 29) informs us that there is a work given as the source of a quotation in Utpalācārya's Spandapradipika which is referred to by the expression "Sankarṣaṇasūtreşu. The four verses quoted are also not to be found in the present SK. Lariviere merely makes the comment that "these Ślokas make poor Sūtras."31) If, however, one takes account of the fact that a sutra from the present SK is referred to in the Bhaṭṭadipikā as ṣaṇasūtra," as is evidenced by the passage "kratvangatvam va cityetvange nopapadyate' (SK I i 15) iti Sankarṣaṇasūtram tu kratvapūrvopayogābhiprāyam vyākhyeyam/" quoted by K. V. Sarma,32) it is certain there existed yet another work able to be designated as the SK.33) 
"Sankar- 
At the start of his Padarthādarśa (PA), a commentary on the Šāradātilaka, Raghavabhaṭṭa (15th c. A.D.), famed as a commentator of Kālidāsa's Abhi- jñānaśakuntala, makes the following statement. This is a passage which has not yet been reported on in studies on the SK. 
iv) tatra sarvāsu śrutiṣu kāṇḍatrayam karmopāsanābrahmabhedena tatra karmakāṇḍam Jaiminiprabhṛtibhiḥ samyaktaya vivṛtam idam upāsanā- kāṇḍam Nāradadibhiḥ, brahmakāṇḍam bhagavad Vyasādibhir iti smr(śru)- 
24) Cf. SK3, p. v, 11. 3-5. 
25) AS, p. 34, 1. 7. 
26) TT, p. 44, 1. 9. 
27) SPR, p. 115, 1. 4; SRBh, p. 32, 1. 25-p. 33, 1. 1; ibid., p. 75, 1. 22. Cf. F. Otto Schrader, Introduction to the Pañcaratra and the Ahirbudhnya Samhita (Madras, 1916), pp. 15-16, etc. 
28) SRBh, p. 89, 1. 29. This probably corresponds to the Sankarṣana-Samhitā. 29) Lariviere, op. cit., p. 194, n. 92. 
30) Although Schrader discusses the relationship between this Utpalavaisnava and the various samhitas of the Pañcarātra school, he does not seem to touch on the Sankarṣaṇa-sutra. Cf. Schrader, op. cit., pp. 18-19. (The present writer has not yet, however, been able to refer to the works of Utpala.) 
31) K. K. Handiqui clearly considers it to be a work belonging to Vişnuism. Cf. K. K. Handiqui, Yasastilaka and Indian Culture, Sholapur, 1968, pp. 363-364. 
32) SK2, p. xii, 11. 11-12. 
33) A work of the Pañcaratra school? 
! 
38 
KANAZAWA ATSUSHI 
timūlakatā asya pratyakṣopalabdhā]... tatra karmakāṇḍe sarvau'py adhikari mumukşor api tattvajñānaparyantam svacittaśuddhyartham pratyavāyaparihārārtham ca karmakarane'dhikarasambhavat tadvad upāsanākānḍepi yataḥ sākāropāsanātaḥ svargādi bahu phalam bhavati kramato muktiś ca, karmakāṇḍāt tu svargādiphalam bahutaravyaya- "yāsena bhavati brahmakāṇḍān muktir api adaranairantaryadirghakālābh- yāsasādhyā nekeṣu janmasu tādṛśeşv eva gateṣu bhavati "anekajanmasam- siddhāntato yāti parām gatim" iti vacanād ata etad upāsanākāṇḍam evāgamaśāstrātmakam garīya iti siddham (PA, p. 1, 1. 34- p. 2, 1. 11) 
After a perusal of a passage such as this, anyone like Lariviere familiar with studies on the SK would consider that what is here called the Upasana- K refers to our SK, and he would doubtless regard the above brief explanation of the Upāsanā-K as referring to the present SK. Finally, he would conclude that yet another riddle had been added to the question of the author of the SK. In previous studies on the SK, summarized in Lariviere's paper, various views ascribing the authorship of the SK to Jaimini, Vyāsa, Kāśakṛtsna and Sankarṣa(na), etc., have been examined.34) Lariviere himself rejects the view ascribing this work to Kāśakṛtsna, although without giving any clear reasons for doing so, with the words "it seems unlikely that Kāśakṛtsna should be considered the author of the SK "35) and, relying above all on the authority of Devasvāmin, a commentator of the present SK, states that "it seems reasonable to proceed on the assumption that Jaimini was indeed the author of the SK."36) In the case of Ito, he contents himself with the following reasonable but vague explanation: "Although views have been current ascribing its authorship to Jaimini, Vyasa or Kāśakṛtsna, it is of course not at all possible to consider that any of these should have composed the S.K. It was, after all, probably compiled by the Mimāmsā school at a time not all that long after the [compilation of the] Jaiminisutra."3" By way of contrast, our above quotation records a view that would attribute the Upāsanā-K (=SK?) to Nārada. Who would this Narada have been? Can he, for example, be equated with the Narada who is specifically mentioned by Sambhu Bhaṭṭa in the statement evam vaiṣṇavam Naradädibhiḥ krtam "38)? Lariviere, who is also a student of the Narada-Smṛti, would no doubt promptly say, "It seems unlikely that Narada should be considered the author of the SK." Is 
cc 
34) Cf. Lariviere, op. cit., pp. 184-186. 
35) Ibid., p. 186, 11. 4-5. 
36) Ibid., p. 186, 11. 18-17. 
37) Ito, op. cit., p. 175a, 11. 7-12. 
38) PrA, p. 44, lc., 11. 13-14. Cf. PBheda, p. 23, 1. 5. 
NOTES ON THE SANKARṢA-KANDA 
39 
it advisable, after all, to consider the ascription to Narada in the PA as being based on the erroneous information passed on by an author who had never actually seen the work in question? But in his introduction (Bhumikā), Sri Mukunda Jha Bkashi (Vakhsi?), the editor of this PA, paraphrases this passage ever so unconcernedly in the following manner: ... yatra karmakāṇḍam pūrvamīmāmsādau, Jaiminyādibhiḥ| upāsanākāṇḍañ ca pañcarātrādau Nāra- dadibhiḥ jñānakāṇḍañ cottaramīmāmsāyām Vyasadibhir upavarṇitam."3 Namely, "the Karma-K was expounded by Jaimini, etc., in the PM, etc., the Upasana-K by Narada, etc., in the Pañcarātra, etc., and the Jñana-K by Vyāsa, etc., in the UM." As this clearly shows, the passage in question does not concern the work SK, also known as the Upasana-K, but should have been interpreted as referring to the Narada who as leader of the Pañcarātra school, etc. (Vaisnava), which was founded in connection with the Upasana-K of the Vedas. But even so this does not mean that we can immediately reject. it as being unrelated to the SK. It indicates that, in accordance with their content, the Vedas are subdivided into three parts, namely, the Karma-K, Upāsanā-K and Jñana-K (or Brahma-K), and that these were expounded by Jaimini, Nārada and Vyasa respectively. The structure of the contents of the passages which we quoted earlier (i), ii) and iii)) is in essence identical with that of this example. It is only the manner of dividing the Vedas, which constitute the primary object of inquiry in the Mimāmsā, that differs, and there is also the difference of Pañcarātra and SK. On the basis of this, too, it is possible to automatically draw the conclusion that the Pañcarātra and SK are identical. Even though designations such as SK or MM may not be used when referring to the "scholastic system" created or the "works" composed by Nārada, etc., in regard to the Upasana-K of the Vedas, this too may be described as one view of the Mimāmsā. This tripartite division of the Vedas as an object of inquiry into the Karma-K, Upasana-K and Jñana-K is not limited to this example alone and may also be frequently met with in other works.40) This merits our attention in connection with the fact that 
39) ST, Bhumikā, p. 1, 11. 24-26. 
40) "karmopāstijñānakāṇḍa vedeşv iva mata iha" (GG, p. 1, 1. 11); "ye devayanapitṛyānā- dibhedena karmopāsanājñānakāṇḍabhedena jñānavijñānasamyagjñānabhedena vā viśvena vyava- hārikajivena carṣaṇā vikalpita ye tripathah trayah panthānaḥ santi,..." (TPUV, SU, p. 1, 1. 12-p. 2, 1. 1); "... karmopāsanājñānakāṇḍaprakāśakaiḥ..." (SiUV, SU, p. 97, 1. 5); etc. This type of threefold classification concords, for example, with the threefold classification of karma- yoga, jñāna-yoga and bhakti-yoga in the Bhagavadgita. When considered in this connection, the commentary on the Sandilya-Bhakti-Sutra by Svapneśvara (10th-11th c. A.D.?), who dis- cusses the relationship between the Bhakti-K and the Jñana-K, Brahma-K, etc., and the relation- ship between the Bhakti-Mimāmsā and Karma-Mimämsä, is also of considerable interest. Cf. SBSSBh, pp. 70, 158, 246, 249, 250. 
40 
KANAZAWA ATSUSHI 
the SK is sometimes referred to by the designation Upāsanā-K. 
It is probably also no mere coincidence that the name Pañcarātra should have cropped up here in connection with the Upasana-K, for today it is not possible to discuss the Pañcarātra without reference to Sankarṣaṇa* (not Sankarşa), one of the members of its renowned four-vyuha theory.42) In con- nection with the Upasana-K, we have now come up with a Pañcarātra that would appear to be linked to the SK, also frequently termed the Sankarṣaṇa- K. That being the case, what then is the relationship between the present SK of the Madhyama-Mimämsā and the Sankarṣaṇa of the Pañcaratra ?43) Although it would be hardly surprising to find that there might have been some confusion even between Sankarṣa and Sankarṣaṇa, it does come as a considerable surprise to find that in SK studies to date virtually no connection has been suggested between Sankarṣa or Sankarṣaṇa and the Sankarṣaṇa of the Pañcarātra, and this in spite of the fact that it was readily surmisable that the SK or traditions relating to the SK often bore a close relationship to, Vişnuism,44) and also in spite of the fact that the meaning of the word "Sankarṣa" or "Sankarṣaṇa" among the designations of the SK is by no means clear-namely, it has not even been possible to determine whether it is a mere common noun expressing the nature of this kanda, as is clearly the case in, for example, the statement "sankarṣyate karmakāṇḍastham evāvaśiṣṭam karma samkṣipyocyate iti sankarṣo devatākāṇḍam"*") by Anandagiri of Sankara's school, or whether it is the name of a person as in the case of Jaimini and Sankara, and whether San- karṣa-K46) was the original name of the SK or whether the name Sankarṣaṇa- 41) These are generally known as Vasudeva, Sankarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. While Sankarṣaṇa is on the one hand treated within Vişnuism as one of the four vyuhas, it has also been pointed out in various studies that he has, alongside with Vasudeva, etc., a rather long history as an independent object of worship in the form of a Sankarṣaṇa cult. Cf. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious Systems (Strassburg, 1913), pp. 3-4, etc.; R. N. Dandekar, "The Beginnings of Vaisnavism" (IT, Vol. III-IV, 1975-1976, pp. 169-186), p. 174ff; etc. 
42) Cf. Schrader, op. cit., etc. 
43) In this connection the question of whether or not there did exist historically a person (or deity) by the name of Sankarṣaṇa and connected with the Mimāmsa is also of considerable interest. We would, for example, like to draw attention to the satirical play Agamaḍambara by Jayanta Bhatta (9th c. A.D.) which might be described as a unique "summary of doctrines." The protagonist Sankarṣaṇa (!) of this drama, who "may have corresponded to someone in reality," is a man of religion belonging to the Pañcaratra school and, what is more, he is described as hāmimāmsaka-Sankarṣanah" (AD, p. 56, I. 15). Cf. ibid., p. xxiv, 11. 14-18; p. xxviii, 11. 7-12. 
In addition, there are also examples where the views of the Pañcaratra school would seem to have been linked to the Sankarṣaṇa-K. Cf. SDSS, p. 41, 11. 12-20; p. 40, 11. 12-13; p. 42, 1. 2; p. 48, 11. 6-7. 
66 
ma- 
44) Cf. S. K. Aiyangar, "Vimsaty-Adhyāya-Nibaddham Mimämsä Sästram," Woolner Com- memoration Volume (Lahore, 1940), p. 3, 11. 36-38. 
45) NN, BrSSBh2, p. 756, 1. 35. 
46) Or simply Sankarşa without Kända?NOTES ON THE SANKARṢA-KĀŅDA 
41 
who would 
K be more appropriate. In contrast to Anandagiri and others attach a particular meaning to the "Sankarşa" of the SK, there are in fact some who attribute the origin of this title to the name of the author. The PH gives the title as Sankarṣa-K and attributes it to Jaimini, yet holds that the commentary was written by Sankarṣa or Sankarṣaṇa.48) An even clearer testimony to the view that Sankarṣa represent the name of a commentator is to be found in the SMS.49) Furthermore, the SSS quoted above may be said to be, like the SMS,50) somewhat singular in that it identifies the Devata-K with the Uttara-Mimāmsā (UM),51) and in regard to the author too it provides a rather unusual view. In the words of Lariviere, "it ascribes the authorship to Sankarṣaṇa via Vyasa."52) Where does this ācāryapāraṁparya of San- karṣaṇa-Vyāsa have its origin? There is probably a need to consider, for example, its relationship to the following tradition which was fostered within Vişnuism, namely: "Brahma Mahesvaraya Maheśvaraḥ Samkarṣaṇāya Sam- karṣaṇo Naradaya Narado Vyasaya Vyaso lokebhyaḥ prayacchad it..."53) If, with this tradition as a premise, one were to regard, as do the SMS and 
47) Cf. Lariviere, op. cit., p. 180; SSA, i, p. 40, 11. 17-18; etc. 
48) There is also the following variant to our quotation i) in regard to the phrase "tatha devatākāṇḍasya Sankarsenal," namely: "tatha devatākāṇḍasya Sankarṣaṇena!" A. Parpola gives for this a new interpretation, differing completely from all other interpretations to date, when he writes, 'I would like to adopt the latter reading and offer the following translation: "Similarly, leaving out the Devatākāṇḍa, a commentary upon the Brahmakāṇḍa was composed by..." (Parpola, "On the Formation of the Mimāmsā and the Problems Concerning Jaimini" WZKS, Bd. 25, 1981, p. 154, n. 37). Reading this passage "tatha devatākāṇḍasya sankarṣaṇena brahma- kāṇḍasya... krtam," Parpola interprets the word sankarṣena (or sankarṣanena), which had previously been considered to record Sankarşa or Sankarṣaṇa as a commentator of the Devata-K, as a mere adverbial phrase meaning "leaving out," and he then seeks to incorporate it within the following sentence referring to the commentator of the Brahmakāṇḍa. This interpretation of Parpola's is, however, a mere flight of the imagination which can on no account be accepted. In the passage in question, which discusses the commentators of the Tantra-K, Devatā-K and Brahma-K, the commentaries are first broadly divided into the Pūrva-Mimämsä-Sastra (=Dharma- Mīmāmsā-Śāstra) and Uttara-Mimamsa-Sastra, with the former being clearly designated as the Tantra-K and Devata-K and the latter as the Brahma-K. Hence, although in regard to the commentator of only the Tantra-K among the Pūrva-Mimāmsa-Sastra (=Sabarasvamin) an expression to the effect of "omitting" (upekṣya) the Devata-K (SK) is meaningful, in the case of the commentator of the Brahma-K the expression "leaving out" (sankarṣaṇena) specifically the Devata-K from among the Púrva-Mīmāmsã-Śāstra would be totally meaningless. On the basis of the text of the PH as it stands at present, the only possible interpretation would appear to be the conventional one, namely, that the commentary on the Devata-K was composed by San- karşa (or Sankarṣaṇa). It seems probable that the anonymous author of the SMS who wrote "iha [=Devata-K] bhāṣyakāraḥ Sankarṣaḥ/" (SMS, p. 10, 11. 13-14) paraphrased this section of the PH (?) after having interpreted it in the same manner as we have. 
49) Cf. n. 48). 
50) The quotation in the SMS, p. 15, 11. 19-20, corresponds to SSS, p. 6, 11. 10-11. Cf. n. 10). 
51) Cf. slokas 20-21 of our quotation ii). 
52) Lariviere, op. cit., p. 185, 11. 7-8. 
53) HGU, VU, p. 404, 1. 23- p. 405, 1. 1. 
42 
KANAZAWA ATSUSHI 
9957) 
SSS, the SK as belonging to the UM composed by Vyasa (=Bādarāyaṇa),5+) it should be little cause for surprise whether the authorship of the SK be ascribed to Sankarṣaṇa, Narada or Vyasa. Then again, the newly discovered Praṇava-mīmāmsā, which was first announced and examined by Lariviere55) and then published forthwith together with a translation and notes by P. Olivelle,56) has as follows: "... kramamuktiphaladatṛSamkarṣaṇācāryaprani- topāsanākāṇḍam... Lariviere makes the comment that "the SK is not mentioned by that name, but is called the upasanakāṇḍa [sic]."58) But this source informs us that not the Sankarṣa (na)-K but the Upasana-K was composed by Sankarṣaṇācārya (and not Sankarṣaṇa). One might compare the "krama-mukti" which here characterizes the Upasana-K with "kramato muktis" which was mentioned as one of the distinguishing features of the Upāsanā-K in iv) above. It is true that the name given in iv) was not that of Sankarṣaṇācārya but that of Nārada. If, however, one calls to mind the above-mentioned mechanism, taking into account, namely, the lineage of the founders of Visnuism (...→→ Sankarṣaṇa-Narada Vyāsa), one could say that the content of the Pranava- mīmāmsā, invoked by Lariviere as a new piece of material on the SK, accords not so much with the present SK but rather with the content of iv). 
In view of our above inquiries, we believe that it should have become clear that the various traditions relating to the SK, Sankarṣaṇa and Upäsanā-K, which up until now would all seem to have been considered in relation to the present SK, do not necessarily concern the one and the same SK, and that therefore the many discrepancies to be found in these traditions can no longer be all regarded simply as the products of erroneous traditions transmitted by people who had never actually set eyes on the present SK. For the future, we feel an acute need for the further discovery and accumulation of new historical evidence relating to the SK and for research to be undertaken from a broader viewpoint not restricted to the field of Mimāmsā studies alone. 
N.B. All underlines in this paper have been added by the writer. 
54) There is a marked tendency to equate the Vyasa renowned as author of the Mahābhārata, etc., with Badarāyaṇa from about the tenth century A.D. onwards. 
55) Lariviere, op. cit., p. 181, 1. 3ff and n. 10. 
56) P. Olivelle, "Praṇavamīmāmsā: A Newly Discovered Work of Vidyaraṇya," ABORI, 62, 1981, pp. 77-101. 
57) Ibid., p. 84, 1. 13. Cf. Lariviere, op. cit., p. 181, II. 4-5. 
58) Lariviere, ibid., p. 181, 11. 8-9. But in point of fact there are no grounds whatsoever for linking this Upasana-K to the present SK. 
NOTES ON THE SAŃKARŞA-KANDA 
43 
Abbreviations 
ABORI: Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 
AD: Agamaḍambara, Darbhanga, 1964. 
AnuV: Anuvyākhyāna, ed. & tr. by Suzanne Siauve, Pondichéry, 1957. 
AS: Adhikaraṇasārāvali, Ubhaya Vedanta Granthamālā 1974. 
BhD: Bhāṭṭa Dipika of Khāṇḍadeva with Prabhavali of Shambu Bhatta, ed. by N. S. Ananta Krishna Sastri & Vasudeva Laxmana Sastri Pansikar, Bombay, 1921. BrS: Brahma-Sutra; v. BrSSBh1 & BrSSBh2. 
BrSSBh: Brahmasūtra Śānkara Bhāṣya; v. BrSSBh1 & BrSSBh2. BrSSBh1: BrSSBh with Other Commentaries, Bombay, 1938. BrSSBh2: BrSSBh with Other Commentaries, Delhi, etc., 1980. 
CSG: Chatusslokibhashyam, Sthothraratnabhashyam, and Gadyatrayabhashyam, 
ed. by Chettaloor V. Srivatsankacharyar, Madras, n.d. 
GG: Gaṇeśagitā with Nilakantha's Tikā, Ānandāśrama Sanskrit Series, No. 52, 1906. HGUV: Hayagrivopaniṣad-vyākhya by Śri Upanisad Brahma-Yogin; v. VU. IT: Indologica Taurinensia. 
MD: Mimāmsādarśana, 7 pts, Ānandāśrama Sanskrit Series, No. 97, 1970-1975. MS: Mimāmsāsūtra; v. MD. 
NN: Nyayanirnaya; v. BrSSBh2. 
NS: Nyāyasudhā, ChSS 14, 1902-1909. 
PA: Padarthadarśa; v. ST. 
PBheda: Prasthānabheda, ed. by A. Weber, Berlin, 1850. 
PH: Prapancahṛdaya, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. 45, 1915. 
PrA: Prabhavali; v. BhD. 
SBSSBh: Śāṇḍilya Bhakti Sūtra with Svapneśvara Bhāṣya, ed. & tr. by Swami 
Harshananda, Mysore, 1976. 
SDSS: Saḍdarśanisiddhāntasangraha, Thanjavur, 1980. 
SiUV: Sitopaniṣad-vyākhyā of Śri Upaniṣad-Brahma-Yogin; v. SU. 
SK: Sankarṣa-kāṇḍa; v. SK, SK2 and SK3. 
SK: Sankarṣa Kanda or the Last Four Chapters of Jaimini, with the Commentary Called Bhatta Candrikā, of Bhāskara[-rāya], ed. by Rama Misra Sastri, The Pandit, 14-16 (New Series), 1892-1894. 
SK2: Sankarṣa Kāṇḍa Sutras of Jaimini, ed. by K. V. Sarma, Hoshiarpur, 1963, 
V. I. Series 18. 
SK3: Sankarṣa Kāṇḍa of Sage Jaimini with the Bhasya of Devasvamin, ed. by 
S. Subrahmanya Sastri, Madras, 1965. 
SMS: Sarvamatasangraha, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. 62, 1918. SPR: Śri Pañcarātrarakṣā, Adyar Library Series, Vol. 36, 1967 (2nd ed.). 
SRBh: Stotraratnabhāṣya; v. CSG. 
SriBh: Śribhāṣya; v. SriBh1. 
SriBh1: SriBh with Bhāṣyārtha Darpaṇa of Abhinava Deśika, 2 pts, Ubhaya Ve- 
danta Granthamālā 1963-1964. 
1 
E 
11 
44 
KANAZAWA ATSUSHI 
SSA: Siddhantasiddhāñjana, 4 pts, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, Nos. 47, 48, 58 & 
61, 1916-1918. 
SSS: Sarvasiddhāntasangraha, Madras, 1909. 
ST: Sāradatilaka with Padarthādarśa, Kashi Sanskrit Series, No. 107, 1963. SU: The Sakta Upanisad-s with the Commentary of Śri Upanisad-Brahma-Yogin, 
ed. by A. Mahadeva Sastri, Adyar Library Series, Vol. 10, 1950 (1st ed., 1925). TnV: Tantravārttika; v. MD. 
TPUV: Tripuropaniṣad-vyākhyā of Śri Upaniṣad-Brahma-Yogin; v. SU. TT: Tattvaṭikā, Ubhaya Vedanta Granthamālā 1974. 
VU: The Vaisnava Upanisad-s with the Commentary of Śri Upaniṣad Brahma- 
Yogin, Adyar Library Series, Vol. 8, 1979 (2nd ed.). 
WZKS: Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens.