Reprinted with permission from the University of Vienna, Institute for South Asian, Tibetan and Buddhist Studies. Back issues of the Vienna Journal of South Asian Studies are available for sale at www.univie.ac.at/istb 
and at www.istb.univie.ac.at/ger/benutz/wzks/wzks.html 
MADHYAMAMĪMĀMSĀ - THE SANKARṢAKĀṆDA 
By Richard W. Lariviere, Philadelphia 
— 
The names for the divisions of the Mimamsāśastra are well known: Purva and Uttaramīmāmsā, Karma- and Brahmamīmāmsā, etc. So are most of the authors and commentators well-known, but there is one portion of the Mīmāmsāśāstra which has been the source of some confusion and dispute both among authors of Sanskrit philosophical treatises and among scholars who have written on this text. This is the so-called Sankarṣa- or Sankarṣaṇakanda (hereafter SK). That the entire Mīmāmsă corpus was to be considered as a unit the Kṛtsnaśā- stra has long been recognized by the writers of Hindu philosophy and by scholars'. The characterization of the two branches of Mīmāmsā as uttara and purva is most common. What is not always clear, however, is the number of chapters ascribed to these two branches. Pūrvamīmāmsa is most often characterized as dvadasalaksanī the Mīmāmsă of twelve chapters. There are also several instances where it is charcterized as soḍaśalaksani. Similarly, the Vedanta or Uttarami- māmsāsūtras are most often considered to be composed of four Adhyayas, but they, too, have had another four chapters added to their numbers from time to time3. The Mimāmsākṛtsnasastra is spoken of as consisting of twenty Adhyayas, and the four chapters which are 
1 See, for example, GANGANATHA JHA, Pürva Mimamsă in its Sources, Benares Hindu University, Vārāṇasī: 21964, p. 1-10; and Sankara on Brahma Sutra 3.3.43. 
2 E. g., Ramanuja, Śrībhāṣya, Bombay Sanskrit Series No. LXVIII, edited by VASUDEVA SASTRI ABHYANKAR, Nirnaya Sagara Press, Bombay: 1914, p. 2; or Seśvara Mīmāmsă of Vedantacārya, Śastramuktavali No. 16, edited by P. B. ANANTACARYA, Sudarsana Press, Conjeevaram: 1902, p. 2. 
3 See the Sarvamatasamgraha, edited by T. GANAPATI SASTRĪ, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series No. 62, Government Press, Trivandrum: 1918, p. 10; and Sarvasiddhantasamgraha, edited by M. RANGACARYA, Government Press, Ma- dras: 1909, p. 2-3. 
S. K. AIYANGAR, Vimsaty-Adhyaya-Nibaddham-Mimamsa-Sastra, in: Woolner Commemoration Volume, edited by MUHAMMAD SHAFI, Meher Chand Lachhman Das Sanskrit and Prakrit Series No. 8, Lahore: 1940, p. 1-6; and: Editorial, Journal of Indian History, volume XV, part 2 (August 1936) p. 261-264. In these two articles AIYANGAR discusses an inscription (No. 76 of 1932-33) from Anur in Chingleput District belonging to the reign of Rajaraja 
180 
R. W. LARIVIERE 
occasionally added either to the Pürva- or Uttaramīmāmsā are those of the SK, or as the Sarvamatasamgraha describes it the Madhyamami- mamsã5. 
The name of this section of the Mimamsa corpus is given variously as sankarsa, sankarṣaṇa-, devatā-, or upāsana-kāṇḍa. Various explana- tions are given for these names and the explanations reflect some of the confusion which is found in connection with the SK. There are authors who feel it is called sankarsa- or sankarṣaṇa-kända because it draws together (samkrs) the remaining topics of the Karmakaṇḍa of the Purvamimamsä. Others claim that it is so named because it was composed or commented on by an Acarya of that name. The designa- tions devatā- and upāsana-kända are because of its subject matter. In his commentary on the SK Devasvamin offers the following explana- tion for the term sankarṣa®: 
siddhair etaiḥ prasangantaiḥ śrutiyogam pradarśayan | 
lakṣanani śrutims caiva sankarṣyatha jage muniḥ || 
"Explaining the joining of the texts with the established princi- ples ending with prasanga (i. e. the first twelve chapters of the Mīmāmsāsūtras) the sage then brought together the rules (lakṣaṇāni) and the texts and then recited them." 
Anandagiri in his Nyayanirṇaya on Sankara's Brahmasūtrabhāṣya 3.3.437 offers this explanation for sankarṣa: sankarṣyate karmakāṇḍa- stham evavasistam karma samkṣipyocyate iti sankarṣo devatākāṇḍam. "The Devatākānda is called sankarsa because it is said that an act which is left out of the Karmakanda is condensed (samkṣipya) and collected (sankarṣyate)." This line of reasoning is followed by Devasva- min who says that scattered rules are collected in this work. Some texts seem to imply that the title SK is based on the allegation that a 
in the year 999 A. D., in which Mīmāmsā is twice referred to as the Mīmāmsā of twenty chapters. See also Sarvamatasamgraha, loc. cit.; Sarvasiddhantasam- graha, loc. cit., and Prapañcahrdaya, edited by T. GANAPATI SASTRI, Trivan- drum Sanskrit Series No. 45, Travancore Government Press, Trivandrum: 1915, p. 38, the text is given below. 
5 Sarvamatasamgraha, loc. cit., also Mīmāmsāpādukā of Vedanta Desika verse 37 and the commentary thereon by Acarya Kumara Śrī Varadācārya (Kumāra Vedanta Deśika) in Mīmāmsāpādukāparitrāṇa, edited by UTTAMUR T. VIRARAGHAVĀCARYA, Ubhaya Grantha Mala, Madras: 1971, p. 299-300. 
Sankarṣa Kanda of Sage Jaimini with the Bhāṣya of Devasvamin, edited by S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI, (Reprinted from the Annals of Oriental Re- search) University of Madras: 1965, p. i. This verse is misprinted in the text 
p. 1. 
Nyayanirṇaya of Anandagiri, edited by Pandita ŚRI CHOTUPATI SASTRĪ, Venkatesvara Press, Bombay: 1892, p. 1138. 
Madhyamamīmāmsā - the Sankarṣakāṇḍa 
181 
commentary was written on the Sutras by an Acārya named Sankarṣa: ...devatākāṇḍātmikādhyāyacatuṣṭayavati. iha bhāṣyakāraḥ sankarṣaḥR. Other texts claim that the Sutras of the SK were actually written by Sankarṣaṇācārya:... uktiphaladātṛsamkarṣaṇācāryapraṇītopāsanakāṇ- dam 10. This is a more satisfactory rationalization for the name san- karsa than the suggestion above that the text is named for its commentator. That would be unusual, indeed. 
It may be noted in this last text that the SK is not mentioned by that name, but is called the upāsanakāṇḍa. The description of the contents of the SK given in the Sarvamatasamgraha indicates clearly that the work of which it is speaking treats upāsana: 
tatra prathame 'dhyāye sarveṣām mantraviseṣāṇām devatātattvaprati- padane tätparyam iti pratipaditam. dvitiye vidhyarthavadäder vedaseṣa- sya mantradevataseṣatvam upapadyate. tṛtiye devatatattvam svecchāvi- grahatvädiguṇaguṇālankṛtam iti darsitam. caturthe tattaddevatāprasā- datas tattallokaveṣavibhāṣaṇaiśvaryānandavāptilakṣaṇam devatopāsana- phalam nirnītam. evam madhyamamīmāmsā sarvadevatātmano hareḥ pratipadiketi sagunabrahmaparā bhavati. 
"In the first chapter the 'purpose' of all special mantras in propoun- ding the essence of devatās is given. The second explains the fact that deities invoked by mantras are what is left of the Veda after vidhi, arthavada, etc. In the third, the adornment of the essence of devatās with no qualities or with qualities such as incarnation at will, etc. is illuminated. The fourth determines the benefits of worshipping devatās such as attaining power and joy from the splendor of residing in the 
8 Sankarṣakāṇḍabhasya of Devasvamin, loc. cit.: prakirnayuktatvāc ca nyāyasya. Appayya Dikṣita says in Vedantakalpataruparimala, edited by ANANTAKRSNA SASTRI, Nirnaya Sagara Press, Bombay: 1917, p. 50: tatrāsutri- tän kämścin nyāyān älakṣya tatsamgrahärtham dvādasalakṣanīm seṣam sankar- şakaṇḍam api kṛtavato maharṣivarasya bhagavato jaiminer...; and p. 838: yady api samkarsakando na devatāvicärätham, pravartitaḥ, kim tu dvādaśalakṣaṇya- vicaritanānāviṣayanyāyavicärätmakas tatparisisṭaḥ tantraprasangavadupadesã- tidesasädhäraṇyena prakirnakaḥ pravartitaḥ. 
9 Sarvamatasamgraha, loc. cit., also the Prapañcahṛdaya, loc. cit., text given below. See also the strange passage of the Sankaradigvijaya (mentioned below) where Sankarṣa and Patanjali are described as joint authors of the madhyam kandam. 
10 Praṇavamīmāmsa by Vidyaranya in a unique manuscript in the Library of the Bharata Itihasa Samsodhaka Mandala in Pune, Ms. no. 39/358. The passage occurs in folio 3a. This work has been edited and translated by PATRICK OLIVELLE and will be appearing in the Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Also, see Sarvasiddhantasamgraha Śloka 21 given 
below. 
182 
R. W.LARIVIERE 
various heavens by the grace of the various devatās. So, the middle Mīmāmsā is the teaching of Hari as the essence of all deities. It is devoted to the Brahman which has qualities."" 
The Prasthanabheda of Madhusudana Sarasvati 12 says clearly that the devatākāṇḍa treats upasana: tac ca devatākāṇḍasamjñāya prasid- dham apy upāsanākhyākarmapratipadakatvät karmamīmām sāntargatam eva. RĀMA MISRA SASTRĪ, the editor of Bhaskararāya's commentary on SK the Bhaṭṭacandrikā, in announcing its imminent publication also referred to it as the upāsanakāṇḍa13. The Sankaradigvijaya of Vidyaraṇ- yal describes Sankarṣaṇa and Patanjali as the authors of the madhyam kāṇḍam also called the upāstiyogakāṇḍa. The commentary by Dhanapati Suri gives yet another name to this work the devatākāṇ- da. 
devatākāṇḍa is a very common gloss for sankarsa 15. The Sarvasid- 
Sarvamatasamgraha, p. 41-42. Compare this with the description found in the Prapancahṛdaya, loc. cit.: tatha devatākāṇḍasya prathamadhyāye sarve- ṣām mantraviseṣāṇām devatātattvapradarsane tätparyam iti pradar sitam. dvit- Tyadhyāye vidhyarthavadanamadheyānām mantradevataviseṣatvam. tṛtīyādhyāye devatatattvam svecchävigrahatvädiguṇāguṇālankṛtam. caturthadhyāye devata- phalam satkarmaṇām apavargadhikāriņas tādātmyalakṣaṇam apavargaphalam 
iti. 
12 Prasthanabheda, published by T. K. BALASUBRAHMANYAM AIYAR, Śrī Vani Vilasa Press, Srirangam: 1912, p. 11. 
13 Sastradipika of Parthasarathi Misra, edited by RAMA MISRA SASTRI, Reprint from the Pandit, E. J. Lazarus and Co., Benares: 1891, note, p.758: mīmām sāśāstrasya tüpāsanakāṇḍavyākhyānasvarupam adhyayacatuṣṭayam avasiṣyate, yathoktam ācāryapādaiḥ śrībhāṣye 'samhitam etac charirakam jaimi- niyena ṣoḍaśalakṣaṇeneti. tad api yathāsamayam prakāśayisyāmaḥ' iti. 
The Bhaṭṭacandrika was published in the Pandit and it seems to have been reprinted, but I have not seen the reprint. The text is scattered through volumes 14, 15, and 16 of the New Series, but this text is not noticed in the table of contents of the various fascicles the introduction, title page, and Pratīka index are printed in volume 16.9 (September 1894). The rest of the text is found as follows: 
- 
volume 14.11 (November 1892), p. 569-584 through 13.2. 12. volume 14. 12 (December 1892), p. 625-640 through 13.4.18. volume 15.2 (February 1893), p. 73-88 through 14.2.4. volume 15.3 (March 1893), p. 129-144 through 14.4, 18. volume 15.4 (April 1893), p. 185-200 through 15.2.12. volume 15.5 (May 1893), p. 241-256 through 15.4. 6. volume 15.6 (June 1893), p. 297-312 through 16.2.19. volume 15.7 (July 1893), p. 353-369 to the end. 
14 Anandasrama No. 22, Poona: 1891, p. 19-20. 
15 This is the gloss given by Anandagiri, loc. cit.; Anubhuti Svarupa in Prakaṭārthavivaranam (on Brahmasūtrabhāṣya 3.3.43), edited by T. R. CHIN. TAMANI, Madras University Sanskrit Series No. 9, University of Madras: 1939, 
Madhyamamīmāmsā - the Sankarṣakāṇḍa 
dhāntasamgraha explains this title in this way 16: 
183 
bhavaty uttaramimämsä tv aṣṭādhyāyī dvidha ca să | devatājñānakāṇḍābhyām vyāsasūtram dvayos samam || 20 || purvādhyāyacatuşkena mantravacyātra devatā | 
sankarṣaṇodita taddhi devatākāṇḍam ucyate // 21 // 
"The Uttaramīmāmsā on the other hand consists of eight chapters; and it is also divided into two parts under the head dealing (respective- ly) with deities and with the wisdom (of true philosophy). Both these divisions of the Uttaramīmāmsā have alike had their sutras (aphorisms) composed by Vyasa. In the first four chapters here (in the Uttara- mīmāmsā) the deities referred to in the mantras are (given as) described by Sankarṣaṇa. For this reason it is called devatā-kāṇḍa (i. e., the part dealing with the deities)." 
The text does not attempt to explain how or what Sankarṣaṇa explained about the deities which was subsequently set down by Vyasa in the Uttaramīmāmsā. 
In any case the designations sankarsa, or sankarsana, devatā, and upasana seem to have been interchangeable in various texts. Whether or not all these designations referred to the same set of Sutras is another question. K. V. SARMA, who edited a single, incomplete manuscript of the SK18, is troubled by the contents of the SK in the Prapañcahrdaya 19, and he claims that there may have been "an Upasana Kāṇḍa (called also Devata-Kaṇḍa or Daivimīmāmsā, which terms are used also for the SK) recognised by some Vaisnavite schools of philosophy..."20. He is correct in wondering at the contents as 
p. 895; Amalananda Sarasvati in Vedāntakalpataru (again, on BSbhāṣya 3.3.43), edited by ANANTAKṚSNA SASTRI, Nirnaya Sagara Press, Bombay: 21938, p. 838; and Govindananda in the Ratnaprabha (on BSbhāṣya 3.3.43), edited by DHUNDHIRAJA SASTRĪ, Kāśī Sanskrit Series No. 71, Benares: 1929, 1931, p. 830. 
16 Sarvasiddhantasamgraha, loc. cit., Ślokas 20 and 21. 
17 M. RANGACARYA's translation. 
18 Sankarsa Kanda Sutras of Jaimini, Vishveshvaranand Indological Series -18, Vishveshvaranand Vedic Research Institute, Hoshiarpur: 1963. 
19 Text given above note 11. 
20 SARMA, op. cit., p. 18. In the 'Index of Papers Submitted to the All-India Oriental Conference Sessions I to XII (1919-1944)', compiled by K. VENKATESVARA SARMA (AIOC, Poona: 1949) there is a paper noted in the following way: "[Sankarṣa-kāṇḍa] The Daivi-mīmāmsă (summary), B. Krishnaswamy Rao. XI Summaries, 85-86". This summary is not in the proceedings and transactions of the eleventh meeting, and I have not been able to see the paper. Another very interesting passage is the comment of Jayatirtha on Madhva's Anuvyakhyana 1.81 which refers to a Devasastra; SUZANNE SIAUVE reports the comment in this way: ... Deva-Sastra, texte184 
R. W. LARIVIERE 
described in the Prapañcahṛdaya, for this description has nothing whatever to do with the contents of the SK as revealed by the incomplete edition of SARMA and the two commentaries which have so far been published 21. His allusion to Vaisnava sects puts one in mind of the ending of the description of the contents of the SK given above from the Sarvamatasamgraha (a text which none of the writers on the SK seems to have known): "So the middle Mīmāmsa is the teaching of Hari as the essence of all deities." 
SARMA and SUBRAHMANYA in the titles of their works attribute the authorship of the SK to Jaimini. ŚARMA 22 says: "Authorities, both late and ancient, have, when context required them to speak on the authorship of the SK, mentioned Jaimini as its author." His enumera- tion of the "authorities" seems to bear him out Rāmānuja 23, Parāśarabhaṭṭa in the Tattvaratnākara 24, Vedanta Deśika 25, Appayya 
— 
inconnu qui commence d'apres Jayatirtha par les mots "athāto daivi (jijñā- sā?)"; le dernier sutra en serait: tam brahmety acakṣate "on l'appelle brah- man". Les deux derniers sutra, d'apres Jayatirtha, sont l'œuvre de Badaraya- ṇa (Nyaya Sudha 277b, 1 [Dharwar edition]).' (La voie vers la connaisance de Dieu [Brahma-Jijñāsā] selon l'Anuvyakhyāna de Madhva, Publications de l'Institute Francais d'Indologie N° 6, Pondicherry: 1957, p. 23 A. 3.) 
21 See notes 6 and 11. The edition of Devasvamin's commentary has a list of the complete Adhikaraṇasūtras at the beginning along with a translation of them. The actual provenance of these Sutras (it is nearly impossible to disentangle them from the commentary alone) is doubtful, however, since the editor, S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRĪ, does not clearly identify the other manu- script sources from which he has gleaned the full Adhikaraṇasutras. He says only that he had access to a "paper manuscript" of Bhaskararaya's Bhaṭṭacandrika which contained full Adhikaraṇasütras (unlike the edition of the Bhaṭṭacandrikā which only has the Pratīkas) and a single palm leaf manuscript of the Sutras alone which extended up to the end of the first Adhyaya. It is not possible to know from S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI's description whether or not his manusc- ript of the full Sutras was the same as that used by SARMA in his edition. 
22 SARMA, op. cit., p. xiv. 
23 Śrībhāṣya, loc. cit., where he approvingly quotes the Vṛttikara to the effect that the Mīmāmsā of Jaimini consists of sixteen Adhyāyas. See below, note 35. 
24 Cf. GERHARD OBERHAMMER, Materialien zur Geschichte der Rāmānuja- Schule 1. Parasarabhaṭṭas Tattvaratnākaraḥ, Veröffentlichungen der Kommis- sion für Sprachen und Kulturen Südasiens, Heft 14, Vienna: 1979, p.78 and 256; also cited by VIDVAN SO. NARASIMHACARYA, Śrauta Sutra of Apastamba and the Bhāṣya of Dhürtasvāmī and the Vṛtti of Agnicit, Mysore Sanskrit Series 11/85, Mysore: 1945, p. lv (introduction), text given below. 
25 Seśvaramimamsa, loc. cit., where the same passage of the Vṛttikāra is quoted. 
Madhyamamīmāmsă- the Sankarṣakāṇḍa 
185 
Dikṣita 26, Sambhubhaṭṭa 27, the Prapancaḥrdaya 28, and the Prasthā- nabheda 29. This is the opinion of a number of scholars as well30 
This is not the unanimous opinion of all "authorities", however. The Sarvamatasamgraha3 attributes the authorship to Vyasa as we have seen above. In that passage the SK is said to be a part of the Uttaramīmāmsā. The Sarvasiddhantasamgraha 32 also places the SK in the Uttaramīmāmsa corpus, but it ascribes the authorship to Sankarṣa- na via Vyasa. There is one manuscript of the Sarvasiddhantasamgraha which has a different reading. This manuscript substitutes sankarenodi- ta for sankarṣodita and it has a commentary which explains sankara as siva 33 
Another name which is posited as the author of the SK is mentio- ned by Vedāntācārya in the Seśvaramīmāmsā 34 where he seems to imply that there are three authors of the Mimamsă corpus: 
sa jayati jaiminir adau jayati punaḥ kāśakṛtsno 'pi/ nārāyaṇāvatāro jayati param badarāyaṇaḥ śrīmān || 
Shortly after this introductory verse 35, however, Vedāntācārya approvingly quotes this passage of the Vṛttikara: samhitam etac charirakam jaiminiyena ṣoḍaśalakṣaṇeneti sastraikatvasiddhiḥh, which seems to imply that in his opinion Jaimini was the author of the SK. There is another mention of Kasakṛtsna as an author of Mīmāmsäsütras in a quote from the Tattvaratnākara found in the Tattvavärttika 36. 
26 See note 8. 
27 Prabhāvalī, edited by N. S. ANANATAKRSNA SASTRI and V. L. S. PANSIKAR, Nirnaya Sagara Press, Bombay: 1921, p. 43. 
28 Prapancahṛdaya, loc, cit. 
29 Prasthanabheda, loc. cit. 
30 DAMODAR VISNŅU GARGE, Citations in Sabara-Bhasya, Deccan College Dissertation Series 8, Deccan College Post-Graduate Research Institute, Poona: 1952, p. 4; S. K. AIYANGAR, Vimsaty, etc. (s. note 4), p. 3; K. C. CHATTERJEE, Kasakṛtsna, Indian Historical Quarterly 8 (1932), p. 225; DHUNDHIRAJA SASTRI, op. cit. (s. note 15). 
31 Sarvamatasamgraha, loc. cit. 
32 Sarvasiddhantasamgraha, loc. cit. This work is attributed to Sankara. EGGELING, Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office, part I, London: 1887, p. 789, says that this work is wrongly attributed to Sankara, but he offers no explanation for his view. 
33 Ibid., p. vii. 
34 Seśvaramīmāmsā, ed. cit., p. 1. 
35 Ibid., p. 2-3. 
36 Cited in SARMA, op. cit., p. xvi; also CHATTERJEE, op. cit., p. 225. See also S.KRSŅASVĀMĪ AIYANGAR, Editorial, JIH, loc. cit. (s, note 4) and OBERHAM- MER, Materialien, cited above, note 24. 
186 
R. W. LARIVIERE 
karmadevatābrahmagocară să tridhodbabhau sutrakārataḥ | jaiminer muneḥ kāśakṛtsnato bādarāyaṇād ity ataḥ kramat || In spite of these verses, and in spite of the fact that Kasakṛtsna is recognized by Patanjali as a great Mīmāmsaka 37, it seems unlikely that Kāśakṛtsna should be considered the author of the SK. 
SARMA 38 claims "authorities, both late and ancient" have named Jaimini as the author of the SK; however, it should be obvious that there are more "late" than "ancient" authorities who have made this assertion. It should be equally obvious that the testimony of such late authorities is not conclusive when those authorities are speaking of the authorship of a text which is centuries earlier than them, and which may not have been directly available to them. The strongest evidence for Jaimini's authorship are Devasvamin's attribution in his commen- tary and the colophons at the end of the chapters of the unique, incomplete manuscript of the SK. In light of this testimony it seems reasonable to proceed on the assumption that Jaimini was indeed the author of the SK. 
The Prapañcahrdaya gives a list of commentators on the SK 39: tasya vimsatyadhyayanibaddhasya mīmāmsāśāstrasya kṛtakoṭināmadhe- yam bhāṣyam bodhayanena kṛtam. tad granthabahulyabhayad upeksya kimcit samkṣiptam upavarṣeņa kṛtam. tad api maṇḍamatin prati duş- pratipadam vistīrṇatvād ity upekṣya ṣoḍaśalakṣaṇapūrvamīmām sāśāstra- mātrasya devasvāminātisamkṣiptam kṛtam. bhavadāsenāpi krtam jaiminiyabhāṣyam. punar dvikānḍe dharmamīmāmsāśāstre pūrvasya tantrakändasyācāryaśabarasvaminatisamksepena samkarsakāndam dvi tiyam upekṣya kṛtam bhāṣyam. tatha devatākāṇḍasya samkarsena. 
The first of the commentators mentioned here, Bodhāyana, the author of the commentary called Krtakoți, cannot be dated with any degree of certainty. UMESA MISRA and JHA have guessed at a date "before the Christian era"40, but nothing more specific than that. In chapter 27 of the Manimekhalai there is a discussion of vaidika systems of philosophy under the rubric pramäṇavāda. There are three sets of pramāņas given there: one attributed to Vedavyāsa and having ten pramāņas, one attributed to "Krtakoţi" and having eight pramāņas, and one set enumerating the six pramaņas of "the present time", 
37 Mahābhāṣya on 4.1.4, 4.1.93, and 4.3.155. See the Mīmāmsāpādukāpari- trāņa, loc. cit. (8. note 5), where the Madhyakāṇḍa is described as being "either jaiminiya or kasakṛtsnīya". 
38 SARMA, op. cit., p. xiv. 
39 Prapancahṛdaya, loc. cit. 
40 JHA, op. cit., p. 14 and appendix p. 15. 
41 This last is attributed to Jaimini by S. KRSNASVĀMĪ AIYANGAR, Mani- mekhalai in its Historical Setting, Luzac and Co., London: 1928, p. 57--58. 
Madhyamamīmāmsā - the Sankarsakända 
187 
S. KRISHNASWAMI AIYANGAR contends, on the basis of the Prapañcahṛ- daya passage, that the Kṛtakoti of the Manimekhalai had become the name by which the author of the Kṛtakoti is now known, and he further says that the original name of the author of this Krtakoți was Bodhayana 12 AIYANGAR does not explain how an author comes to be called by the name of his work (why not kṛtakoṭikāra, for example?), but goes on to claim that the man Krtakoți was the Vṛttikara who is cited by later Mīmāmsakas 43. This identity of Vṛttikāra and Bodhāya- na was guessed at by JACOBI, as well, but the consensus seems to be that the second commentator on the SK listed in the Prapañcahṛdaya, Upavarṣa, is the Vṛttikara 45. There is, however, some reason to believe that Bodhayana and Upavarṣa may have been the same man46. V. A. RĀMASVĀMĪ ŠĀSTRI has estimated Upavarṣa's date as somewhere bet- 
42 Ibid., p. 61-62. 
43 Ibid., p. 62-67. In the Vaijayanti, edited by G. OPPERT, Madras Sans- krit and Vernacular Text Publication Society, Madras: 1893, p. 95 Śloka 154 of the Brahmaṇadhyaya of the Bhumikāṇḍa says-halabhūtis tupavarṣaḥ kṛtako- tis ca saḥ "Halabhūti, i. e. Upavarsa, is the composer of the Krtakoţi". 
44 HERMANN JACOBI, The dates of the philosophical sutras of the Brah- mans, Journal of the American Oriental Society 31 (1911), p. 1-29- Kleine Schriften, volume 2, Steiner, Wiesbaden: 1970, p. 559-587. 
45 A. B. KEITH, The Karma-Mimamsa, The Heritage of India Series, Association Press, Calcutta: 1921, p. 7-8; V. A. RAMASWAMI ŚĀSTRĪ, Old Vṛttikāras on the Pürva Mimämsä Sütras, Indian Historical Quarterly 10.3 (1934), p. 431-452; and JHA, op. cit., p. 5. 
40 S. KUPPUSWĀMĪ SASTRĪ, Bodhāyana and Dramiḍācārya, Two Old Ve- dantins presupposed by Rāmānuja, Proceedings and Transaction of the Third Oriental Conference, Madras... 1924, Law Printing House, Madras: 1925, p. 465-473; and T. R. CHINTAMANI, The Date of Sri Sankaracārya and Some of his Predecessors, Journal of Oriental Research 3.1 (1929), p. 53. VAN BUITENEN, Rāmānuja's Vedārthasamgraha, Deccan College Monograph Series No. 16, Poona: 1956, p. 18-24 treats the question of Bodhayana or Upavarṣa as the Vṛttikara. He denies the identity of the two, but in general his conclusions are stated with more certainty than the presented evidence supports. His interpretation of Brahmasütrabhāṣya 3.3.53 ata eva bhagava- topavar sena prathame tantre ätmästitvābhidhānaprasaktau sārīrake vakṣyāma iti uddhāra uktaḥ is suspect. He seems to feel that this must mean that Upavarṣa knew a single "context" (p. 20) composed by Jaimini which contai- ned both the Karma and Sarirakasūtras. As a plausible support for this interpretation he cites Sureśvara's strange statement in the Naiskärmyasiddhi 1.91 (Col. JACOB's edition, Bombay: 1891, the sambandhokti on p. 54-55) that Jaimini was the author of both the Purva- and Uttaramīmāmsasūtras. This is reaching too far. It is much more likely that Upavarṣa meant what he said — sārīrake vakṣyamaḥ "we will explain this (in our commentary) on the Sārīraka", i. e. in the concluding portion of the Mīmāmsākṛtsnaśāstra. 
— 
188 
R. W. LARIVIERE 
ween 100 B. C. and 200 A. D.47, but aside from this, little is known of Upavarṣa and little more can be said of his views; and, like Bodhāya- na, nothing substantial may be said of his commentary on the SK since it is not known to exist. 
The order of the next two commentators as given in the Prapañ- cahrdaya must be reversed since Devasvamin mentions Bhavadāsa in his commentary 48. Not much is known of Bhavadasa. He is mentioned by Kumārila and Parthasarathi Miśra in the Ślokavārttika 62-64 and the commentary of Nyayaratnakara (on Śloka 33)49. Appayya Dīkṣita in Vedāntakalpataruparimala 50 says:...sankarse nānāpradānādhika- raṇasyānyārthapradarśanac ceti guṇasūtram bhāṣyakṛta bhavasvaminet- tham vyakhyātam. 
It seems possible that this Bhavasvamin would be our Bhavadāsa since there is no record of a Bhavasvamin having commented on the SK. In a note to his translation of the Ślokavarttika51, GANGANNATHA JHA equates Bhavadasa with Vṛttikāra, but in light of his opinion mentioned above (cf. note 45) that Upavarṣa is the Vṛttikara, it must be assumed that he meant only that the author of the comments presently being discussed in those Karikas of the Ślokavärttika was 
47 V. A. RAMASWAMI SASTRĪ, op. cit., p. 434. Someśvara in the Nyayasudha, edited by MUKUNDA SASTRI, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benares: 1909, p. 632, says that Kumārila refers to Upavarsa as mahābhāṣyakāra. P. V. KĀŅE, Gleanings from the Bhashya of Sabara and the Tantravārtika, Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 26 (1921-23), p. 84 denies that either Bodhayana or Upavarṣa is the Vṛttikara, and he claims, without much evidence, that the Vṛttikara was much earlier than Upavarṣa. See also KANE, Vedanta Commentators before Sankarācārya, Proceedings of Fifth Indian Oriental Conference, volume II, Lahore: 1930, p. 937-953. 
48 Cf. Devasvamin's Bhāṣya on SK 3.2.1., ed. cit., p. 132 where he claims to have reproduced a portion of Bhavadasa's commentary: asmin päde 'apurvāt tathā somaḥ' ity arabhyapadasamapteḥ bhavadāsam eva bhāṣyam iti. The editor, S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI at pages v-vi claims that this mention of Bhavadā- sa is not the work of Devasvamin, but that it is an insertion by a copyist who did not have the commentary of Devasvamin on this particular Sūtra. That is possible, but it does not seem likely in the context of the commentary. E. FRAUWALLNER, Materialien zur ältesten Erkenntnislehre der Karmami- māmsā, Veröffentlichungen der Kommission für Sprachen und Kulturen Süd- und Ostasiens, Heft 6, Vienna: 1968, p. 107-113 identifies Bhavadasa as the Vṛttikara mentioned by Dignaga. His theory of why the proper name of the Vṛttikara is lost (p. 113-he attributes it to the superceding impact of Śabara) is a reasonable one. 
49 See the edition by RAMA SASTRI TAILANGA, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series No. 11, 12, 15-21, 24, Benares: 1898-99. 
50 Vedantakalpataruparimala, ed. cit., p. 839. 
51 Ślokavārttika, Bibliotheca Indica No. 146, Calcutta: 1901, p. 116.Madhyamamīmāmsă- the Sankarṣakāṇḍa 
189 
Bhavadasa 52. Bhavadasa, too, falls into that dark period of Purva- mīmāmsā chronology known only as "pre-Sabara" 53 
At last, with Devasvamin we have an extant commentary. If he is taken to be the same Devasvamin as the writer on Dharmasastra, then he may be dated to the 11th century A. D. based on KANE's eminently logical reasoning 54. KANE, however, says that there are not sufficient data available to establish this identity 55, while S. SUBRAHMANYA ŚĀ- STRI56 and V. A. RĀMASVĀMĪ ŠĀSTRI57 dismiss KANE's doubts and flatly state their belief that the two Devasvamins are identical. In fact, the two were the same man. Devasvamin is quoted by Hemadri on parvasandhikālanirnaya in Caturvargacintamani 58: yadi pūrvāhne par- vasandhiḥ samapyeta tato nitaram eva ca sobhanam, yadi punar aparāh- ṇe rātrau vā tad aharupoṣya svobhüte yāga iti. Devasvamin's SKbhāṣya on Sütra 3.1.7 reads: yadi purvāhṇe sambhavyeta tato nitaram sobha- nam. yadi aharupoṣya śvobhute yāgaḥ kartavya iti. There seems little doubt but that the Devasvamin of Caturvargacintamani and that of SKbhāṣya were the same author. This means that Bhavadasa must be considerably earlier than Devasvamin, perhaps by as much as 900- 1000 years 59 
Next, the Prapañcahṛdaya tells us that Sabarasvamin left out the SK when writing his commentary of the Purvamīmāmsāsūtras. This view is not universally agreed upon. UMESA MISRA 60 simply says that he did write a commentary on the SK as is clear from the way he cites the SK at 10.4.32 and 12.2.2. K. C. CHATTERJEE seems to agree with UMEŠA MISRA and states that it is a fact that Sabara wrote such a commentary, although he offers no evidence for his opinion. RÄMA 
61 
52 This has caused some confusion in the past; see S. RADHAKRISHNAN, Indian Philosophy, volume 2, George Allen and Unwin, Ltd., London: 1927, p. 376-377 note 6; and S. KRSNASVĀMĪ AIYANGAR, Manimekhalai, p. 62. 
53 P. V. KĀŅE, History of Dharmasastra, volume 5 part 2, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona: 1962, p. 1197 says that Bhavadāsa's date is 100-200 A. D. but with very little evidence. 
54 Ibid., volume 1 part 2, p. 591-593. 
55 Ibid., p. 593. 
56 S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI, op. cit., p. ix. 
57 In his edition of the Tattvabindu by Vacaspatimiśra with Tattvavibhā- vana by Rṣiputra Parameśvara, Annamalai University Sanskrit Series No. 3, St. Joseph's Industrial School Press, Trichinopoly: 1936, p. 58-59. 
58 Caturvargacintamani, edited by Pandit YAJNESVARA SMRTIRATNA and Pandit KAMAKHYA NATH TARKAVAGISA, Bibliotheca Indica No. 72, volume 3 part 2, Calcutta: 1895, p. 324. 
59 This would agree with KANE's date for Bhavadāsa, see note 53. 
60 UMESA MISRA, op. cit., p. 19. 
61 K. C. CHATTERJEE, op. cit., p. 225. 
190 
R. W.LARIVIERE 
MISRA SASTRI in his introduction to Bhaskararaya's SKbhāṣya 62 claims that the quotations in that commentary are from Sabara's lost com- mentary, but ŚARMA has traced these quotations to Devasvamin's commentary 63. S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI64 says that Sabara, Kumārila, and Prabhakara found Devasvamin's commentary so complete that they had nothing to add, and it is for this reason that we have no commentaries on the SK from those authors. If, as we have suggested, Devasvamin is from the 11th century then it is impossible that this could be the reason for there being no commentary from Sabara et. al. GARGE 65 hedges and his opinion on this matter is not clear. K. V. ŚARMA 66, however, is quite correct in his view that there is no evidence that Sabara wrote a commentary on the SK. Sabara's mention of the SK in his Bhāṣya is a certain acknowledgement of the existence of the SK, but the words iti sankarse vakṣyate (10.4.32) and iti sankarse vakṣyati (12.2.2) should not be interpreted to mean iti (mayā) sankar se (bhāṣye) vakṣyate, but as SARMA suggested67 iti sankarṣe (sūtrakāreņa jaiminina) vakṣyate. 
As we have seen, the Sarvamatasamgraha and the Prapañcahṛdaya claim that a commentary on the SK was written by Sankarṣaṇa. NARASIMHACARYA 68 also says that such a commentary was written by such a person, and he goes on to say that the author of the commentary has given his name to the text itself. This is pure conjecture. There is no other evidence to support the existence of a commentary on the SK written by a Sankarṣaṇa. The claim by the Sarvamatasamgraha and the Prapancahrdaya that there was such a commentary should also be dismissed as conjecture, or more likely as a misunderstanding of the tradition of the SK. 
There is some reason to believe that Govinda wrote a commentary on the SK. Hemadri 69, again, quotes a statement made by Govindopa- dhyaya on the SK (tatha samkarṣaṇakände govindopadhyāyenoktam ...). Since there is no extant commentary on the SK by Govinda, it is difficult to know which Govinda is being quoted here. The editor of the Sarvasiddhäntasamgraha, M. RANGACARYA, gives excerpts from an 
62 RĀMA MISRA ŚĀSTRĪ, op. cit., p. 6 of his introduction 
63 SARMA, op. cit., p. xix. 
64 S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI, op. cit., p. iv. 
85 GARGE, op. cit., p. 4-5. 
60 SARMA, op. cit., p. xiii-xiv. 
67 Ibid., p. xv. 
08 NARASIMHACARYA, op. cit. (s. note 24), p. lxii—lxiii. 89 Caturvargacintamaņi, loc. cit. 
see note 13. 
Madhyamamīmāmsă - the Sankarṣakāṇḍa 
191 
unpublished commentary on that work which posits a possible identifi- cation of our Govinda. The comments are on 1.22 which is: 
bhāṣyam caturbhir adhyāyair bhagavatpādanirmitam | 
cakre vivaranam tasya tad vedantam pracakṣate || 
"A commentary (thereon) in four chapters has been composed by the venerable teacher. The explanatory commentary which he produced in relation to that (other part of the Uttaramīmāmsā) is spoken of as Vedānta, "70 
The excerpts from the commentary are: bhagavatpadaḥ śrīmān sankarācāryagurugovindabhagavatapujyaḥ. asya devatākāṇḍasya bhāṣ- yam sūtrāṇām vyākhyānam bhagavatpadanirmittam ity aha. uttaraca- tuskasyapi bhāṣyam ācārya praṇitam ity aha. tasyottaracatuṣkasya vedāntasūtrasya vivaraṇam sārīrakabhāṣyam yac cakre tal lokaḥ vedän- tam iti pravadantity arthaḥ" 
Thus the bhagavatpada is, according to the commentator, none other than Śankarācārya's teacher, and it is explicit that the commen- tator feels he wrote a commentary on the Devatākāṇḍa as well as on the Vedantasütras. There is no evidence to confirm or deny the claim since none of the writings of Sankara's teacher on the SK are preserved. Moreover, it is necessary to be cautious about ascribing a commentary on the SK to Sankara's teacher based only on the disparate testimonies of the commentator on the Sarvasiddhāntasam- graha and Hemadri. 
The commentary of Bhaskararaya, the Bhaṭṭacandrika, has been edited and published 72. It quotes the commentary of Devasvamin extensively 73. This text gives only the Pratīkas of the Adhikaranasū- tras, a fact which caused M. L. SANDAL to denounce it as spurious 74. GARGE75 also claims that this was "not an authentic work", but he seems to have based his conclusions on a poor reading of JHA's opinions of the work. JHA did not expressly doubt the authenticity of the Bhaṭṭacandrika 76, but he did admit of being puzzled by the editor's 
70 Sarvasiddhantasamgraha, ed. cit., p. 3-4, RANGACARYA's translation. 71 Ibid., p. vii. 
72 See note 13. 
73 See note 62 and 63. RAMA MISRA ŚĀSTRĨ attributes the quotation in Bhāṭṭacandrikā to Sabara, but SARMA has shown that they are from Devasva- 
min. 
74 SANDAL's doubts about the authenticity of the SK are found in the introduction to his translation of the Mimamsa Sutras: Sacred Books of the Hindus, Volume 27, Allahabad: 1925. 
75 GARGE, op. cit., p. 5. 76 JHA, op. cit., p. 11. 
192 
R. W. LARIVIERE 
description of the work as the upasanakāṇḍa" when the published Bhaṭṭacandrika seemed to have so little to do with upāsana. Bhaskararaya's date has been given as ca. 1700-1760 by V.A. RĀMASWĀMI ŚĀSTRI78 and it has been pointed out by him and others that the Bhaṭṭacandrika was intended to be a completion of Khandadeva's commentary on the Purvamīmāmsāsūtras; indeed, it was M. L. SANDAL's position that the SK was a likely forgery by Khandadeva or by Bhaskararaya79. Such an extreme suggestion is unnecessary in light of the published text of the Bhaṭṭacandrikā. 
Another commentator on the SK was probably Rājacūḍāmaṇi Dīkṣita (1580-1650 A.D.)80 who is said to have written a commentary called Sankarṣamuktāvalī, Nyāyamuktāvalī, or Sankarṣanyāyamuktā- vali. A commentary with the last title was reported by HULTZSCH in 189681 but the manuscript has never been published. It is apparently incomplete (35 palm leaves) and ends, according to the colophon, with the fourth Pada of the first Adhyāya. There is little room for doubt concerning the authenticity of the tradition that Rajacudamaņi wrote a SKbhāṣya since he and his commentators mention it themselves 82. V. A. RAMASWĀMĪ SASTRI also raises the possibility that Vasudeva Dikṣita may have written a commentary on the SK 83. While it is true that he often cites the SK and Devasvamin's Bhāṣya by chapter and verse in the Adhvaramīmām sākutuhalavṛtti84, there is no other evidence for a SKbhāṣya composed by Vasudeva Dīkṣita. There is one other interest- ing text which was noticed by OPPERT 85 in 1880-the Sankarṣaṇasu- travicara which is described only as a Mīmāmsā text with no mention of the author. 
- 
The doubts expressed by SANDAL and GARGE about the authenticity of the SK can no longer be entertained at all, and SANDAL's objections 
77 Quoted in note 13 above. 
78 V. A. RAMASWAMI SASTRI, op. cit., p. 140. 
79 M. L. SANDAL, op. cit., p. viii. 
80 V. A. RAMASWAMI SASTRĪ, Tattvabindu (s. note 57), p. 122-124. 
81 E. HULTZSCH, Reports on Sanskrit Manuscripts in Southern India, No. II, Government Press, Madras: 1896, manuscript no. 1489 from the collection of Kodaṇḍarāma Šāstrī at Tiruviśainallur. 
82 SARMA, op. cit., p. xx. 
83 V. A. RAMASWAMI SASTRI, Tattvabindu, p. 141. 
84 Adhvaramīmām sākutūhalavṛtti, edited by S. KUPPUSWAMY ŚĀSTRĪGAL, Vānī Vilasa Press, Srirangam: 1907-1908, p. 150, 160, etc. 
85 OPPERT, Lists of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Private Libraries of Southern India, volume 1, Government Press, Madras: 1880, manuscript no. 5692 — in the possession of Aṇṇasvāmī of Śrīvalliputtur. 
Madhyamamīmāmsā - the Sankarṣakāṇḍa 
193 
have been refuted point by point twice 86. The SK as printed by S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI, ŚARMA, and RAMA MISRA SASTRI is a genuine Mîmāmsǎ work, and most probably composed by Jaimini. The name of the work which has caused so much speculation is no doubt based on the verb samkrs as Devasvamin 87 and Anandagiri 88 have suggested. It is a "drawing together", a "collecting" of various points important for the ritual which were not included in the first twelve Adhyāyas of the Pūrvamīmāmsāsūtras. If that is so, then how does one explain the statements of other writers that there was a commentator or even an author named Sankarṣa(na) who is responsible for the name of this work? How does one account for the nearly identical descriptions of the contents of the four chapters of the SK in the Sarvamatasamgraha and the Prapañcahṛdaya, but which have nothing to do with the contents of the SK as it has been published? Why is a text which treats the details of yajña referred to as the upāsana- or devatā-kāṇḍa? 
- 
The most obvious answer to these questions and to the confusion in general about the SK is that the text simply cannot have been commonly studied for a very long period. in its history. It is, after all, not cited often and then not very extensively. The reasons for this neglect can only be guessed at perhaps its miscellaneous nature made it less appealing. Certainly, the fact that Sabara barely acknow- ledges it, and Kumārila, and Prabhākara ignored it altogether was an important factor in its subsequent neglect. Once the text had fallen. into the far reaches of dark memory, the confusions arose. It never was lost, obviously. Devasvamin (11th c.), Bhaskararaya (18th c.), and, probably, Rajacūḍāmaņi Dīkṣita (16th-17th c.) all knew the SK, and their commentaries were known and cited by others (for example, Vasudeva Dikṣita who cites the SK and Devasvamin's commentary by giving the Adhyaya, Pāda, and Adhikarana by the numbers 89). Yet, 
86 V. A. RAMASWĀMĪ SASTRI, The Samkarsa Kanda - A Genuine Supple- ment to the Purva-mīmāmsā Śastra, Indian Historical Quarterly 9 (1933), p. 290-299; SARMA, op. cit., p. ix-xiv. 
87 See notes 6 and 8, above. 
88 See note 7, above. 
89 See note 84, above. R. G. BHANDARKAR, Report on the Search for Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bombay Presidency during the Year 1883-1884. Government Central Press, Bombay: 1887, p. 27-32 speaks of the Apastam- basūtradhvanitārthakārikā by Trikandamanḍana Bhaskara Misra, son of Ku- mārasvamin. In this description he notes that there is mention of the SKbhāṣyakara (folio 26 a line 4 of this manuscript no. 21 of 1883-1884) and SK (23a, line 1 and 27b, line 3). This work was edited by TARKĀLANKĀRA BHATTACARYA, Bibliotheca Indica No. 140, Calcutta: 1903, but in this edition there is no mention of the SK, the SKbhāṣya, or it's author. 
13194 
R. W.LARIVIERE 
access to the SK and knowledge of it cannot have been very common. Vedanta Desika (14th c.) refers to it as the madhyaḥ kändas ca luptasthitiḥ90 and Meghanādārisūri (14th c.) refers to it and adds: devatākāṇḍas tv asmābhir dṛṣṭacaraḥ; atas tatprakriyā mṛgyāa1. ŚARMĀ, RĀMA MISRA SASTRI, and S. SUBRAHMANYA SASTRI have found this work and published it, but having the text of the Sutras and two commenta- ries has not resolved all questions which are connected with the SK. There is still the possibility that a work on upasana will be discovered which conforms to the descriptions of it in the Sarvamatasamgraha and in the Prapancahṛdaya and which would explain the citations of Sankarṣaṇasūtras which are nowhere to be found in the published SK 92. Until then, the questions about the various points of confusion which have been raised in the preceding paragraphs can only be answered by conjecture. 
90 Mīmāmsāpāduka, loc. cit. (s. note 5). 
91 Nayaprakasika of Meghanādārisüri, edited by V. ANANTACARYA and V. KṛṣṇAMĀCĀRYA, Madras Book Depot, Madras: 1936, p. 238. 
92 For example, the Spandapradipika of Utpalācārya, edited by GOPINĀTH KAVIRAJ in: Yogatantra Granthamala, volume 3, Vārānasīya Sanskrit Viśva- vidyalaya, Vārānasī: 1970 at p. 109: 
anyac ca sankarṣaṇasütresu: 
svātmaikaniṣṭham cidrupam bhāvabhāvapariṣkṛtam | svasamvedanasamvedya prakṛtyätitagocaram || iyam yoniḥ smṛtä vipra manträṇām pratyayātmikā / te mantra varnarupena sabāhyābhyantaroditāḥ || naiṣkälikapadavasthaḥ karaṇānīva dehinam | prayuktāḥ sarvakāleṣu siddhyante viryayogataḥ || 
and at p. 115: 
sankarṣaṇasūtreṣv api: 
yenedam drayate visvam draṣṭā sarvasya yaḥ sada | drsyas caracaratve yaḥ sa vişnur iti giyate || 
These Ślokas make poor Sūtras.