I may here mention that there are four supplementary chapters of the Mîmânsâ which go under the name of the Sankarṣa kanda It consists of the chapters, Pâdas and sûtras as follows :- 
Supplementary chapters called संकर्ष कांड 
Pâdas 
Chapter 
Total 
1st 
2nd 
3rd 
4th 
XIII 
15 
18 
24 
27 
84 
XIV 
41 
18 
15 
30 
104 
XV 
25 
36 
20 
14 
95 
XVI 
12* 
19 
22 
10 
63 
Grand total 
346 
... 
There are no Adhikaranas 
HITEFFET 
and the Sûtras are meagre; it is an 
apocryphal portion of the Mîmânsâ most probably palmed off as genuine by खांडदेव the writer of भाद्रदीपिका. It has a commentary called भाट्टचन्द्रिका by भास्कर son of गंभीर, 
to have been commented upon by 
Ramânuja school 
This apocryphal portion is known under the name of is and is said No commentary of शबर has yet been found. There is no doubt that ra has referred to as while commenting upon III. Tre 3 of the Vedanta Sûtras, He quotes "arat ar Zaar quæana ;” refers to it. 
we find this in the mutilated form in Sûtra 15 of chapter XIV. Påda 2 of is. The writer of the commentary called वेदांतप्रदीप, who belongs to that school has also referred to it. It cannot be said with certainty that the संकर्षणकांड or संकर्षकis referred to by the Râmânuja school commentators is the same as published in the "Pandit" the monthly publication of the Benares Sanskrit College. What puts one in doubt is that Râmânuj has referred to araraagfa, has quoted in the commentary on Sûtral of the Vedanta Sûtra "feañaverúca जैमिनीयेन षोड़शलस पेनेति शास्त्रैकत्वसिद्धिः" ("This शारीरिक शास्त्र has been collected by Jaimini and is characterised with sixteen chapters and is therefore one Sastra"), has said that by virtue of the Satkas and chapters, there is a division of the anterior and posterior Mîmânsâs and has quoted the first Sûtra of 
* There is one Sûtra added at the end; if it is counted, there will be 13 Sûtras in this Pâda. 
xi. 
the Mîmânså and the last Sûtra of the Vedanta in order to show that the 
two together form one body of the Sastra. 
Further, all the writers on the Mimânså have characterised 
No mention of संकर्ष कांड 
by any commentator. 
मधुसूदन सरस्वती 
refers to it. 
66 
तथा 
twier 89 
containing 12 chapters. 
s 
See 
Arvatafataazal, að dat, Atajar zara zara, #taier afcarar and gatuit. 
मधुसूदन सरस्वती the writer of प्रस्थानभेद says in connection with the twelve chapters of the Mîmânsâ after giving their contents “amı İKİ¶KİY««qwaraaggarendi Afafandtag | aqÈqarmix संज्ञया प्रसिद्धमप्युपासनाख्य कर्मप्रतिपादनात्वात्कर्म मीमांसातर्गतमेव. ' “ Similarly संकर्षणकांड consisting of four chapters was compiled by जैमिनि.. That being known under the title of aris and dealing with the subject of sacrifice, is included in the Karma Mîmânsâ ". 
No mention of it 
in 
दर्शनसंग्रह 
The writer of the Sarvadars'ana Sangraha has given a summary of only twelve chapters of the Mîmansa. 
From the conflicting views, it appears that the Sankarṣa Kânda was once regarded a separate treatise but not a part of Jaimini's रामानुज time. 
Mîmâneâ consisting of twelve chapters It formed a sepa- rate book and was passed off as the genuine work of Jaimini by the interes- ted persons. Râmânuja was born in 1127 A. C.; we find is referred to by him for the first time; 
Strange to say that the 
Alberuni and 
Abul Fazal do not mention it. 
present form is 
भास्कर or खंडदेव appear to be the 
author. 
a cat gave a detailed account of it. 
is is not mentioned by Alberuni and The latter has given the contents of 
Abul Fazal. the twelve chapters of Jaimini's tier. For these reasons, I am of opinion that 
is is a spurious work. work as it exists in the 
Further I am of opinion that the either the work of खांडदेव or भास्कर. The latter after mentioning the incomplete commentary of raw says. 'जासीत् षोडशलक्षणी श्रुतिपदा वाधर्ममीमांसिका । संकर्षाण्यचतुर्थभाग faye mân ararea u arast faazıfenâa fagiceifa a1987ā i aiguinanceÂungar geftcât menT: 1” " That धर्ममीमांसा containing the Vedic texts had sixteen characteristics; the 4th part called die was lost in course of ti ne : even now like having 3 feet, it is constantly read. Bhaskara, son of ET with great labour brought it to completion. " Bhaskara seems to be a great admirer of ta and dedicated the work in the name of his master and called it If after 
fa of his preceptor; I think he was his contemporary. Khanda Deva is said to be the preceptor of T fat the author of 
लहरी, रसगङ्गाधर, भामनीबिलास &c. The latter lived in the reigns His time 
of Shah Jehan and Aurangzeb. da must have flourished in the reign of Shah Jehan as he is said to have died in 1665 by Keith. 
dainie was never popular. 
xii. 
The air never found popularity amongst the students of the Mîmânea and was therefore very properly consigned to oblivion. We do not find it mentioned in any ancient works prior to रामानुज or मधुसूदन arcerat. The editor of the Pandit' believing it to be a genuine work of Jaimini did well in publishing it and putting it before the Mîmânsâ reading public. 
The style of the so called Sutras does not resemble that of Jaimini; it is Style. so very curt and mutilated that one can not make out anything without the help of rear's refer. There are 
no अविकरणs which are the peculiar characteristios of fat's twier. Each chapter has 4 pâdas as shown in the above table. 
The last Satra in the 4th Pada of the 4th chapter which is called the 
16th Chapter in the work, ends with the word " 
Peculiarities. 
" which has been repeated twice andimitated from the final endings in Sankhya Pravachana or the Vedâanta Sûtras It is a valuable work in the Mîmânsa literature and is more in the nature of the Kalpa Sûtra. It does not discuss any general principle as is done by Jaimini in his Mîmânsa. The well-known twelve principles have been discussed in the twelve chapters by Jaimini, but in the present work under discussion, there is a simple description of the post-sacrificial minor 
It cannot be considered a sup- plement of the Mîmângâ. 
ceremonies which really form the subject of Śrauta part 
of the Kalpa Sutra. In this view which I take of the dani, it can not be considered a supplement of Jaimini's Mîmânsa.