THE SANKARŞAKĀNṆA 
Introduction 
THE Sankarṣakāṇḍa, containing four chapters with four Padas in each chapter, forms the latter part of Pärvamimasă. The former part otherwise called Tantra Kāṇḍa consists of twelve chapters. The author of the entire Sastra was sage Jaimini. It is also claimed that together with the four chapters of Badarāyaṇa's Brahmasutras, Mimamsa is one Sastra with 20 chapters. Śrī Ramānāja lays emphasis on this. Sri Sankara also gives some support to this view when he says: "Now existence of an Atman different from body has been explained in the beginning of the Sastra in Pada I". But he condemns the unity of the two Śastras in unequivocal terms in 1. 1. 4, saying "if the purpose of the Sastra is niyoga or effort it has already been explained in the Purvakäṇḍa and the beginning of a different Sastra will be futile." There are no two opinions regarding the authorship of Jaimini in respect of the whole of Purvakāṇḍa. Bādarāyaṇa, Dhurta Svāmin, Sabara Svāmin, Sankara, Rāmānuja, Śrīkaṇṭha and others have quoted some 
of the sutras.1 
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NAME SANKARŞA 
To elucidate the term Sankarṣa Devasvamin quotes an old verse: 
सिद्धैरेतैः प्रसङ्गान्तैः श्रुतियोग प्रदर्शयन् । 
लक्षणानि श्रुतीश्चैव सकृष्याथ जगे मुनिः ॥ ( 1-1-1) 
(After having discussed many s'ruti-texts in the twelve chapters ending with Prasanga the sage brought together the topics and 
(1) Sankara, Rāmānuja and Srikantha - 
- 
नाना वा देवता पृथक्त्वात् (Brahmasūtra Bhāgya - 3-3-43) Dharta svaminen (Prapathaks 10) Sabera तथा च वक्ष्यति etc., 10-4-32, and तथा च वक्ष्यते 12-2-11 Devasvamin इदं चोत्तमसूत्रे मङ्गलाभिधायिपदं प्रयुक्तमाचार्येण । तत्रादी अथशब्दधर्मशब्दौ मङ्गलार्थों अन्ते विद्यत इति पदं मङ्गलार्थम् । 
ii 
śruti passages for discussion). Anandagiri, the famous commenta- tor on Sankara's Bhasyas, explains the word thus: 
सङ्कृष्यते कर्मकाण्डस्थमेवावशिष्टं कर्म संक्षिप्योच्यते इति सङ्कर्षो देवताकाण्डम् । (under B. S. 3-3-43) (Since rules of interpretation relevant in the Tantrakāṇḍa but left out, are herein brought together in one place, it is called Sankarṣa.) Devasvamin indicates this view when he says "Nyayas are scattered here and there in this work' (1. 1. 1.) 
DEVATAKANDA 
This Kāṇḍa is also known by the name of Devatākāṇḍa.' Answering the question as to how it came to be called Devatākāṇḍa, Appayya Dikṣita says that though Sankarṣakāṇḍa is a collection of Nyayas pertaining to Karmas relevant both in the Upadeśa and Atideśa Şaṭkas (chapters 1 to 6 and 7 to 12) it is called Devatākāṇḍa since there are numerous adhikaraņas dealing with deities in it. Saying thus he quotes ten of them." Vedanta Desika says thus in Sataduaṣaṇī (p. 19): "Devatākāṇḍa has been accepted by the author of Śrī Bhāṣya as a supplement to Karmakāṇḍa as is inferred from his quotations from Sankarṣakāṇda like, "It has been said in Sankarṣa etc." Quoting two sūtras supposed to be the last two Sutras of that Kanda Śri Deśiką continues.' The Devatadhikaraṇa of the Tantrakāṇḍa which rejects body etc., for the deities is intended only to glorify the Karmas. When Vedic rituals themselves have the potency to bestow the fruits of the rituals for the performer Jaimini thinks that there is no necessity to accept embodied deities. Thus the unity of the two Sastras is also preserved". 
Sri Narasimhachari, the editor of Apastamba's Śrauta Sutras with Bhāṣya (Mysore edition)' says in his Introduction. Appayya Dikṣita, completely denying the collection of Sutras called Devatākāṇḍa, accepted by Advaitins upto the time of the Ratnaprabha and equally accepted by Visiṣṭadvaita authors right from the Bhāṣyakāra, says that Devatākāṇḍa 
(2) प्रकीर्ण युक्तत्वाच्च न्यायस्य ( 1-1-1) 
galenush 
(3) Amalānanda - Anandagiri and Anubhati Svarapa ugu 
(under for Brahmasūtrabhāṣya 3-3-43) (4) Vide Index C. 
iii- 
deals only with dicussions about Karma. It is true that there are discussions about Karma also in Sankarşa. But since Sankara and Rāmānuja have quoted from Sankarşa it is plain that the main feature in Sankarṣakāṇḍa is discussion about deities. Because the nature etc., about deities not discussed before is the main purport, it is called Devatākāṇḍa. Since a person called Sankarṣa or Sankarṣaṇa wrote a Bhasya upon it, it is called Sankarga or Sankarṣaṇa. Because the name Sankarṣa does not indicate the subject it deals with, Ramananda and Prakaṭārthakāra have explained the term as Devatākāṇḍam. The author of Prapancahrdaya also calls it Devatākāṇḍa. Though Sankargana wrote a Bhāṣya on it, it was thrown to the background, as Sabarasvamin ignored it and Kumārila Bhaṭṭa and Guru, the great exponents of Mīmāṁsā, did not care to write commentaries on it. But, being connected with the Tantrakāṇḍa, the portion dealing with Karma alone survived. The portion dealing with deities was purposely suppressed by those who had a tendency towards atheism. 
As the work existed till the time of Ramananda with the disappearance of the part dealing with deities, Anandagiri had to coin some derivation to the word Sankarṇa- etc.), but at the same time accepted the old expression of Devatakaṇḍa.” 
All this has to be examined again in the light of the discovery of the Sankarṣakāṇḍa containing four chapters with Devasvamin's Bhāṣya thereon, now published for the first time. From the words of Sankara and Rāmānuja we cannot conclude that there was a portion of the Sankarṣakāṇḍa which deals exclusively with deities since the Sūtra quoted by them pertains only to Karma and is traceable in the present text. Moroever, if there was such a part then the theory that the whole Mimāmsa contains 20 chapters will not stand since that part will cover more chapters. Further, if Jaimini accepts an embodied deity in that Kanda, how can he reject body etc., for deities in chapter 9 of the Tantrakāṇḍa. It may be said that it was the commentator Śabara who rejected body for deities and not Jaimini since there is no Sūtra to that. But it is against the nature of Sabara, nay, of all the Bhāṣyakāras, to go against the Sutras and if he actually went against the Satras he would have expressed the same plainly. Moreover, Badarāyaṇa referring 
iv 
to Jaimini's views regarding deities says: "Jaimini considered non-eligibility of Deities in regard to Upasanas, since it is not possible with regard to Madhuvidya and since the words aditya, soma, etc., signify only the luminous bodies in the sky." (B. S. I-3-31, 32,) If Jaimini accepted embodied deities, how could Bādarāyaṇa refer to Jaimini like this? Devasvamin the present author of the Bhasya on Sankarşa holds the view that Jaimini did not accept embodied deities. Regarding the suggestions that the Kanda attained the name Sankarṣaṇa or Sankarṣa- na from the name of the author Sankarṣaṇa who wrote a Bhāṣya on it, we have to consider whether there is any work at all which is called by the name of the commentator. In Sūtra literature particularly, the work derives its name from the name of the author, or at times from the subject it deals with, and never from the name of the commentator. Further the author of Prapañcahrdaya (11th century) a work which enumerates all the works of the Mimāmsā sastra, both available and non-available, says, "In Mīmāmsā is laid down rules of interpretation for the former and latter parts of the Vedas. It consists of twenty chapters. Of these the first sixteen chapters deal with the discussions about Dharma and the rest with Brahman. Bodhayana wrote a Bhasya on them called Krtakokti. As this was a very voluminous work, Upavarşa wrote a smaller commentary on them called Vrtti As this was also found difficult for ordinary intellects, Devasvamin wrote a brief Bhasya on the whole Sastra. Again Sabarasvāmin wrote a Bhasya on the Tantrakāṇḍa alone (Ch.1-12) omitting Sankarṣa. Bhavadasa also wrote a Bhagya on Jaimini's Sūtras". 
We do not see an author by name, Sankarṣaṇa mentioned here as having written a Bhāṣya on a part of the Sankarṣakäṇḍa. To say that the Sankarṣakāṇḍa was ignored by Sabara is contradictory to fact. We have got two quotations from Sabara. Appendix c.) It may be that Sabara, Bhaṭṭa and Prabhakara did not write commentaries on it. But since they had nothing more. to say beyond what Devasvamin had said, they kept silent 
(Vide 
(5) ननु निरस्तं विग्रहादिपञ्चकं ; न पुनस्तन्निरासोऽधिकरणार्थः न देवतातः फलं न देवताप्रयुक्ता धर्माः न च स्वरूपेण देवता कर्मण्यङ्गभावं प्रतिपद्यते इत्यधिकरणार्थः । (S. K. P. 204). Here Devasvamin accepts the rejection of body etc., for deities in chapter 9.) 
Later writers like Parthasarathimiśra, Appaya Dīkṣita, Vasudeva Dikita, Sambhu Bhatta and others have profusely quoted from the Sankarṣakāṇḍa. When so many authors have quoted from this Sankarṣakāṇḍa we do not understand how it escaped the notice of Śrī Vedanta Desika. Śri Deśika himself does not assert that the two Sutras he quotes as the last Sutras of the Sankarṣakāṇḍa do genuinely belong to that work. He says that it is the tradition of the knowers of truth " इति तत्त्वविदां सम्प्रदायः If Jaimini himself had said that the word Brahman denotes Viṣṇu there would not have been much controversy among the Vaisnavas, Saivas, and Advaitins about the exact meaning of the word Brahman. Devatākāṇḍa could not have been suppressed by those who had a faith in tradition and traditional works. Those who preserved the other chapters of Mīmāmsā had the same regard for the Sankarṣakāṇḍa also. Anandagiri did not invent a derivation for the word Sankarsa, but he only quoted the derivation mentioned by Devasvamin, the commenta- tor of the Sankarṣakāṇḍa. 
Thus Śri Appayya Dikşita's interpretation of the word Devatakanda seems to be genuine. 
COMMENTARIES ON THE SANKARṢAKĀŅDA 
According to the Prapancahrdaya Bodhayana, Upavarṣa, Devasvamin and Bhavadasa seem to have written commentaries on the Sankarṣakāṇḍa. But Devasvamin's Bhāṣya alone withstood the wrath of time. In Chapter III. i we find in the present text the words " अस्मिन् पादे 'अपूर्वत्वात्तथासोमे' इत्यारभ्य आपादपरिसमाते : भावदासमेव माष्यम् ". The author of these words could not be Deva- svamin as taken by some. When Devasvamin himself was able to write his own Bhāṣya upon that Pada, he would never incorporate another author's work in his Bhagya. These words must rather be the words of the scribe who copied the whole work. Not finding the Bhasya of Devasvamin upon that Pada, he would have copied the Bhasya of Bhavadāsa for that portion alone. This is common in the Mahabharata and the Ramayana manuscripts where for different sections com- mentaries of different authors are copied in the same codices. Thus Pada I of Chapter III of the present work is the Bhāṣya of Bhavadāsa, while the rest is the Bhasya of Devasvamin. 
• 
vi 
Hemadri (1230-1300) mentions a commentary on the Sankarṣa- kāṇḍa by Govindopadhyāya." Rājacūḍāmaņi Dikṣita (1580- 1650) also wrote a commentary as Sankarṣa.' But these commen- taries are not available to us. Fortunately another commentary by Bhaskararaya (1700-1760) very valuable though brief, is available in many libraries. It was also printed in the Pandit Series of Banares. Bhaskararaya was an ardent admirer of Khandadeva and his Bhaṭṭadipika which is a critical summary of Sabara's Bhāṣya and its commentaries. Bhattadipika extends only from Pada 2 of Chapter I to the end of Chapter 12. Thus it has neither beginning nor end. So to make up this deficiency Bhaskararaya wrote summaries of these portions on the model adopted by Khanda Deva and made it complete. He says at the end of his work..: 
खण्डदेवकृतमाट्टदीपिका लक्षणैः कतिमिरसम्भृता । 
इत्युदीक्ष्य बुधमास्करानिचित् मारती बरिमराम्बभूव ताम् ॥ अद्यावधि कृतिरेषा आद्यन्तविहीनेति दीपिकाख्यासीत् । षोडशकलाभिरधुना परिपूर्णा माट्टचन्द्रिकात्वमगात् । 
SANKARṢAKANDA SUTRAS 
In the available manuscripts of Sankarṣakāṇḍa the Sūtras are so mixed up with the Bhāṣya that it was generally considered that the extraction of the Sutras from it was impossible. But with the help of a paper manuscript of Bhaskararaya's Bhatta Candrika in which the whole Sutras of each Adhikaraņa is given in full kindly lent to me by Professor Raghavan, I began the work of editing Sankarṣakāṇḍa Sūtras with the Bhāṣya. There was also another palm leaf manuscript of the Sankarṣa Sutras alone extending up to the end of Chapter I in the same collection in the Sanskrit Department which also has been used in the edition. This latter was useful in editing Ch. 1. For editing the remaining chapters, I had the advantage of the Bhatta- candrika manuscript which gave Adhikaraṇa Sutras in full. The problem of extracting the Guna Sutras from the Bhagya had to be solved in this way. In the Bhāṣya text the words like " इति प्राप्ते नमः" " वाशब्दः पक्ष व्यावर्तयति ” etc. indicated the 
" 
(6) तथा सङ्कर्षे गोविन्दोपाध्यायेनोक्तम्- - चतुर्वर्ग चिन्तामणिः 
Vol. 3, p. 324 (7) 'Report on Skt. mass, in South India, Vol. II No. 1489, p. 69 
vii 
Siddhanta Sutras which followed. The words indicated Sutras of new Adhikaranas which were introduced on the model of the previous Adhikaraņas. The words at a following लिङ्गाच्च indicated that लिङ्गाच्च are Sūtras. The words 'इष्टकाविवृद्धी किं प्रकृतानामेव etc., following इष्टकाविवृद्धौ तद्व्याख्यातं indicated that the previous passage is a Sutra. Some Sutras which are very lengthy give rise to the doubt whether they are Sutras or the Bhāṣya text. e. g. etc., (4-3-16). But here the words Aaaga: etc., in the end show that the previous passage is a Sutra. Such long Sutras can be accepted in Sankargakāṇḍa on the model of fi etc., (1-4-54) a Sutra according to the Sūtrapaṭha itself. Real difficulty was felt in many other Sūtras, e.g., य इन्द्रियकामो वीर्यकामः स्यात् ( 4-4-6 ) and अभित्वा शूर (4-4-7). Here the words of the Bhāsya in the end सूत्रद्वयं अविद्यमानपूर्व- etc., came to my rescue since it shows that the passages above are Sūtras. (4-3-29) is another example. Here Bhattacandrika gives only the beginning of the Sutra. But since the passage is not complete up to a I decided that the Sutra ended with that word and the remaining portion is the Bhāṣya. The subject matter of these two lines concurs with that given by Bhattacandrika 
. 
• 
There are however some peculiar features in the Sankarṣakāṇḍa Sutras not observed in the earlier 12 chapters or in the Brahma Sutras. They are: 
2 
1. 
(1-4-53) and 3-1-35 
2. चित्रया यजेत पशुकाम इत्युक्त्वा (Ch. 2-4-6) 
3. अर्धशब्देन विधीयन्ते 2-4-27 
4. अपेन्द्रद्विषत: अयमपि तत् न सोमस्य धर्मः पशूनामस्ति 3-4-14. 
Here the words मन्यामहे, उक्त्वा, विधीयन्ते, अयमपि are peculiar to to Sankarṣa Sutras. 
From these peculiarities we cannot decide that they are not Sutras, since there is clear evidence to show that they are Sutras. The Sutra fai area 3-3-31 is repeated again (3-3-37) 
There is as a rule the repetition of the last word of the last Sūtra at the end of each chapter and repetition of the whole Sutra 
viii 
in the end in the Brahma Sutras. But no such rule is followed in all the 16 chapters of Purvamīmāmsa. The last word of the last Sutra in Ch. II and the last two words of the last Sutra in San- karṣakāṇḍa alone are repeated. The repetition in chapter II is according to the Bhasya a sign of the completion of the chapter, while the repetition of the last Sūtra is a sign of the completion of the Sastra. 
THE BHAŞYA 
The Bhasya of Devasvamin resembles the Bhasya of Śabara. Being old and out of use for a very considerable period, the correct text of the work has not been preserved. We find from the work of Bhaskararaya (18th Century) that it was read and taught in his time but later it was neglected by scholars who were satisfied with the first twelve chapters for Mimāmsa and the last four for Vedanta. Altogether four manuscripts are available. 1. One belonging to Malabar; 2. the second to the University Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum; 3. the third to Madras Govt. Oriental Manuscripts Library and the fourth belonging to the Adyar Manuscripts Library, a manuscript which originally belonged to Santiniketan. The manuscript of the Govt. Oriental Manuscripts Library which is a transcript of the Malabar Manu- script, formed the basis of the work. Other manuscripts were compared. All manuscripts seem to be of the same origin, since variations are very few and wherever there is lacuna in one manuscripts, we find the same lacuna in others also. The Sutra नाना वा देवतापृथक्त्वात् which is quoted in all Brahma Sīūtra Bhasyas is absent in all manuscripts though it is found in the Bhattacandrika of Bhaskararaya. In a few places the Bhasya is in such a muti- lated condition that it is not possible to find out the correct reading. However with the aid of Bhattacandrika which deals with each Adhikaraṇa clearly expressing the purport of each Sutra I was able to make out a clean text though imperfect in some places. I have suggested correct readings in rectangular brackets and indicated the surplus words by circular brackets. 
WORKS REFERRED TO IN THE BHAŞYA 
Devasvamin, the author of the Bhagya, quotes the Mīmāmsa Sutras profusely but not Sabara's Bhasya thereon. He quotes a Vṛttikāra in 4-2-19, This Vrttikära might be Upăvarṣa who 
ix 
is often quoted by Sabara and whose Vṛtti is said to have comprised, all the 20 chapters of Mīmāmsā. Quotations from Vedic texts are numerous. Most of these are from Taittiriya Samhita and Brāhmaṇa. These have been traced in Appendix B. But quotations from other Śakhas have yet to be traced. 
DEVASVAMIN 
Devasvāmin has also written commentaries on Śrauta-Sutras and Grhya Sutras of Aśvalayana. His Grhya Sūtra Bhāṣya has partly been published by the late Dr. C. Kunhan Raja in the Adyar Library Series. His Sankarṣakāṇḍa Bhāṇya has been quoted by Hemadri (12th cent.), Appayya Dikṣita and other later writers but not by any earlier authors. Hence Dr. P. V. Kane concludes that he must belong to the 11th century of our era. According to Prapancahrdaya (11th century) however he precedes Bhava- dasa who is quoted by Sabara (2nd Century). 
My thanks are due to the curators of the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras and the University Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandram, and to the Librarian, Adyar Manuscripts Library, Madras, who kindly lent me the manuscripts of Sankarṣakanda in their charge for editing this rare work. I am specially grateful to Dr. V. Raghavan, Professor and Head of our Department for lending me the manuscripts in his custody and helping me with his valuable suggestions at every step. Lastly I thank the Syndicate of the Madras University for including this work in the Madras University Sanskrit Series. 
University of Madras } 
1-1-1965 
S. SUBRAMANYA SASTRI 
jj